


What is an Unhealthy Diet?  

In the last few years, there have been changes in the lifestyle of people in India in rural and   urban areas. Improved economic growth and status among some people has led to dietary   changes. Increasing poverty levels have also led to changes in people’s eating habits. 
People have shifted from consuming traditional and fibre-rich foods like whole products   - wheat (atta products), jowar, bajra, maize, unhusked dals (with outer covering), fruits   and vegetables towards eating more processed foods like - white rice, maida, husked dals   (without outer covering), foods of animal origin, foods available in packaged forms which   are ready-to-eat and cook, etc.  
A diet rich in sugar, salt, fat, foods such as red meat - mutton, liver; milk and milk products   such as full cream milk, butter, ghee, but  low in the amount of  fruits and vegetables is   called an Unhealthy Diet.  
It is important however, to remember that healthy eating is not only the type of food   consumed. It also refers to the way food is prepared and consumed. Food prepared with   excess of fats, sugar, salt, or consumption of refined foods, ready-to-eat and packaged   foods are all risk factors causing NCDs.  
Food Group  Examples* 
Vegetables and Fruits   Green leafy vegetables - spinach, mustard   leaves (sarson), fenugreek leaves, bathua,   coriander leaves etc; 
Other vegetables - carrots, onion, brinjal,   ladies finger, cucumber, cauliflower, tomato,   capsicum, cabbage etc; 
**Starchy roots and tubers - potatoes, sweet   potatoes, yam, colocasia and other root   vegetables; 
Fruits - Mango, guava, papaya, orange, sweet   lime, watermelon, lemon, grapes, amla, etc. 
Milk and Animal Products  Milk and milk products - Milk, curd, skimmed   milk, cheese, cottage cheese (paneer), etc.; 
Animal products - Meat, egg, fish, chicken, liver,   etc. 
Oils, Fats, Sugars and Nuts  Oils and Fats - Butter, ghee, vegetable cooking   oils like groundnut oil, mustard oil, coconut oil,   etc; 
Sugars - Sugar, jaggery, honey; 
Nuts - peanuts, almonds, cashew nuts,   pistachios, walnuts, etc.  

* These examples will change according to local crops and diets in different areas  **  Starchy roots and tubers like potatoes, sweet potatoes (shakarkandi), yam (jimikand), colocasia (arbi) and other root    vegetables; as well as fruits like banana are rich in starch which provide energy.  
