
tobacco use, training of healthcare providers on tobacco control, establishing clinics in   healthcare facilities to quit tobacco, and to oversee effective implementation of COTPA. 
You should know about this, so that you can educate community members on this aspect. 

What are the Benefits of Giving up Tobacco? 

Even after a person has been consuming tobacco in any form for any period of time, giving   up tobacco has several benefits. They include improvement in breathing, reduction in   risk of heart attack, or cancer and improved health. However, giving up tobacco causes   withdrawal symptoms for which the person needs to be supported by her/his family. 

Withdrawal symptoms 

When a person quits the habit of tobacco consumption, they are likely to have “withdrawal   symptoms”. These include: 
Headache  Anxiety/feeling of worry, concern 
Nausea/vomiting  Depressed mood 
Constipation or diarrhoea  Increased hunger 
Fatigue (tiredness), drowsiness and   difficulty in sleeping  Increased desire for the taste of sweets 
Irritability  Desire for tobacco 
 
Withdrawal symptoms can be reduced by the support and encouragement of family and   friends, finding ways of keeping oneself busy, drinking plenty of fluids, regular exercise,   sufficient sleep and eating a balanced diet, or even simple things like carrying out deep   breathing exercises. 

What are the Various Forms of Alcohol? 

Alcohol is consumed in India in many forms by all age groups: adolescents, men, women   and older adults. There are various forms of alcohol: 

l
  Alcohol made from locally grown grains, vegetables and fruits. Eg.  arrack ,  mahwa,   tari  ( toddy ) etc. 

l
  Distilled alcohol/foreign alcohol like whisky, rum etc. 

l
  Beer. 

l
  Locally made drinks which are illegal but consumed widely. 
Although alcohol has been being widely used in India for a long time, in recent years the   harmful use of alcohol has increased. This means that people are drinking in quantities   which has harmful effects on body.  
