explain to people, that they need to be first screened by the ANM and then the diagnosis   will be confirmed by a medical officer. The key message is most NCDs are preventable   and also that NCDs including cancer can be treated if detected early. 
In completing the formats and CBAC, you will be asking individuals for Aadhaar numbers.   Please note that every individual has to provide their consent to giving you the number.   At Annexure 3, is a consent form that every individual must sign. 

3. Screening 

Screening is an activity where a person even though she/he is   apparently healthy, is examined physically, or with the help of   equipment or tests to identify if they have a disease condition.   Individuals with Non-Communicable Diseases may   appear healthy, so it is important to screen adults at   regular intervals. This time period is different for different   conditions. For hypertension and diabetes screening   should be conducted every year, and for cancers once   in five years.  
On a fixed day, every week, the ANM will undertake   screening for hypertension, diabetes, oral and breast   cancer. Until the ANMs are trained for detecting cancer   of the cervix, screening for cancer cervix will take place   at the PHC/CHC nearest the village. Depending on the distance the screening by ANMs   can take place at the village or at the sub- centre. In urban areas, this can take place in the   Urban PHC or outreach sessions. Screening involves examination of the mouth and the   breast by the ANM, measurement of BP and glucose.  

Target population (for screening): 
 
All men and women of 30 years and above for Oral cancer, Hypertension and Diabetes   Mellitus. 

 All women of 30 years and above for cervical and breast cancer. 
Your tasks prior to the screening day are to mobilise the community to attend the   screening on the date and time of the ANMs visit to the village or the date on which they   need to go to the sub centre. 
You should remember that most of the people will at first not agree to being examined,   since they are healthy. You will need to use your skills to convince people that screening   would help to identify disease conditions that may not have symptoms till the disease   is advanced. If you find it difficult to convince any individual, you can ask the ASHA   facilitator and ANM to visit the family along with you and explain the importance of   screening. 
On a particular day, about 30 people can be screened. Thus, in twelve or thirteen days   you can screen the target population. These will be spread over the entire year. The ANM   will make a schedule for screening in her area-and you will get the dates for your area   from her. This also means that you will have to make sure that the number of people on a   particular screening day, do not exceed thirty. Otherwise the ANM will be overburdened   and crowd management will be difficult. You will also help the ANM in recording the  
