


a result, they often can only afford to eat rice or roti, with no pulses or vegetables. Also,   particularly in the case of urban poor, long working hours do not leave them enough time   to cook healthy meals, such as the use of leafy green vegetables or healthy grains that take   longer to cook. The poor also live in places where there are higher risks of air pollution,   such as near factories which release harmful chemicals. So, you can see that the risks of   NCDs can be higher among the poor, when compared to the rich, who may have more   time and money to invest in healthier lifestyles. 
Non-Communicable Diseases are also associated with higher health care costs due to   long and expensive treatment. With NCDs, you cannot stop taking medicines once you   feel better  you have to keep taking them to keep illness away, often for a lifetime. But   many people stop taking medicines once they feel better or when they run out of money.   These illnesses also require close monitoring and regular follow up by a health service   provider. The poor may not be able to visit a health centre regularly as that would mean   loss of wages. High transportation costs to and from the health facility, lower energy to do   work, lack of money to make healthy food choices and stress, are added factors leading to   higher levels of Non-Communicable Diseases among the poor. 
Treatment for Non-Communicable diseases is generally spread over a long period of time.   In case of complications, people may need hospitalisation. This can lead to financial   hardship. Such illnesses of even one family member could affect the familys income.   This may result in the children dropping out of school, or even affect the consumption of   nutritious food for the rest of the family. 
Women are particularly disadvantaged as they are often more vulnerable because of their   status within the family and society. Poverty is a factor that increases this vulnerability. In   comparison to men, they lack access to healthcare, have little control over the household   income and are unable to make decisions for themselves regarding care and treatment.   Also, as a tradition in many households, women eat leftovers which may not constitute   a healthy dietary choice. Therefore, it is important to increase womens awareness   about Non-Communicable Diseases and ensure that they participate in screening and   treatment programmes.  
