What is Hypoglycaemia (Low Blood Glucose)? 

Among those with Diabetes a condition called  Hypoglycaemia   or  low  blood sugar levels can occur. Hypoglycaemia occurs when   blood sugar (glucose) level falls below a level of 70 milligrams per   decilitre (mg/dl) or less.  
Symptoms are tremors, nervousness or anxiety, sweating,   irritability, confusion, rapid/fast heartbeat, dizziness, hunger,   nausea, blurred/impaired vision, headaches, weakness or fatigue,   lack of coordination, seizures, unconsciousness, etc.  
There are several reasons why this may happen. One cause can be   a long gap between two meals. The other common reason is side   effects of some anti-diabetic drugs.  
Hypoglycaemia can be treated by consuming a small amount   of sugar-rich foods as soon as symptoms appear. For such an   emergency, diabetic patients should be advised to always carry   something to eat such as loose sugar, rock candy ( misri ) or toffee   etc.  
Motivating diabetics to regularly monitor blood glucose levels,   eat regular meals, creating awareness on hypoglycaemia and   providing a tailor-made treatment plan with drugs, etc. are some   of the ways to prevent Hypoglycaemia amongst diabetic patients. 

Management and Control of Diabetes 

Change in lifestyle behaviours is effective in preventing or delaying   the occurrence of Type 2 diabetes or the onset of complications.   They include 

Maintaining a healthy body weight - avoid excess weight gain.  

Regular physical activity of at least 30 minutes of regular activity for at least 5 days a   week. Higher levels of activity are required for weight control. 

Take regular small frequent meals. Skipping a meal can lead to low blood sugar level.   Eat a balanced and healthy diet-avoiding sugar, salt and fats in the diet.  

Eat foods that are high in fibre like fruits, vegetables, whole grains, cereals, whole   pulses with chilka (skin) and their products. 

Avoid tobacco in any form. 

Avoid drinking alcohol. 

Regularly check the blood sugar levels. 

Follow medical advice of the doctor. 
