


Introduction 

In the last ten years, we have seen improvements in the health of mothers and children. This   includes an increase in institutional deliveries, immunization coverage, improvements in   infant and child health, and reductions in maternal and infant deaths. You, as an ASHA,   have played a large role in making this happen.  
You were selected as an ASHA to serve your community and improve health outcomes   for the people. So far, you have been trained on topics related to maternal, new born,   child health, nutrition and infectious diseases. You were also trained on issues such as   improving communication skills, negotiation and building community relationships,   reaching the most vulnerable or remote populations, and on addressing violence against   women in the community.  
The country has made progress in improving maternal and child health and communicable   diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis and leprosy. But now, we face another set of health   challenges. You must have heard in your community that people complain of having high   blood pressure or high blood sugar or suffering from cancers.  
These complaints are heard across the country. More and more people are affected by   diseases like heart attacks and stroke, cancer, asthma and breathing difficulty, mental   disorder injuries, kidney, liver and other problems. These diseases are called Non-  Communicable Diseases (NCDs).  
This module will tell you more about these NCDs. It will also guide you on how you can   help people in the community in preventing NCDs and in identifying and supporting   those who are affected by them. However, you must remember that your efforts on   community prevention and control of communicable diseases and in improving maternal   child health, continue to be important. 

Let us first understand what we mean by Non-Communicable Diseases? 

NCDs are diseases of long duration. These are non-infectious conditions that cannot be   transmitted to other individuals. Some NCDs progress slowly or cause chronic symptoms   requiring long term care and control while others progress rapidly. They affect adult men   and women but children are vulnerable as well. People may appear healthy but still suffer   from these conditions.  
One of the most serious concerns about NCDs is that they affect people in the productive   years of their life. They also cause premature deaths -  that is, a death occurring before   the average life expectancy. Though NCDs can affect a person at any age, older individuals   are more vulnerable to NCDs. 

Module for ASHA on Non-Communicable Diseases 
