measurements. On every screening day, you also have to ensure that VHSNC and MAS   members are also present and support you in undertaking health promotion activities.  
There are also likely to be people in your community who have already been diagnosed   with one of these conditions. Their BP and glucose should be measured on a monthly   basis and not necessarily on the screening day.  

4. Undertaking Health Promotion 

In chapter 1, you have learnt about the importance of health promotion. You have also   learnt about how to undertake health promotion related to specific risk behaviours. You   have learnt how healthy lifestyles like diets, physical activity, and avoidance of tobacco   and harmful drinking, etc ,can lead to prevention of diseases. You will need to make   sure that health promotion activities are continuous and not limited to the screening   day alone. You can also undertake health promotion during home visits and community   meetings, including meetings of the VHSNC/MAS. 

5. Undertaking Follow-up for Treatment Adherence and Enabling   Lifestyle Changes 

If an individual is referred by the ANM to the PHC-MO, you will need to follow up with   them or even escort them to the health facility. Your task is to ensure that all individuals   who are asked by the ANM to visit the health facility actually are examined by the MO.   Some of them may be put on treatment for blood pressure or diabetes. Some may need   to go to a CHC or district hospitals for confirmation of cancer. At Annexure four is a list   of health care services for each condition that is available at the various levels of facility,   including referral sites. 
Once an individual is put on treatment for hypertension or diabetes the treatment is most   likely lifelong. Your task is to make sure they obtain their supply of drugs from the sub   centre or PHC, and are regular in taking the medicines. You will also need to undertake   home visits to ensure that they are making changes in their life style and adopting positive   health behaviours. This will reduce the likelihood of complications.  
Sometimes patients may complain of symptoms that could be a result of side effects of   medicines. You must refer them to the MO in the PHCs. In the case of cancer patients,   the treatment is at the level of a medical college or specialised cancer treatment centre.   However, when the patient returns home you should follow up to provide support and   enable referral in case of any symptoms.  
