


What is Passive Smoking? 

Smoking cigarettes or bidis not only harms the individual’s health but also harms those   who are standing nearby or sitting in the same room where an individual is smoking.   Exposure to second hand smoking is called Passive Smoking. Children and women are   especially exposed to the dangers of second-hand smoke, if they have a family member   who smokes. 
Passive smoking is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer, heart attack, difficulty   in breathing, coughing, asthma, ear infection, irritation to the eyes, nose and throat, and   long-term negative effects on the brain.  

Effects of tobacco use  

Tobacco use is dangerous. The negative health effects include both  long-term  (i.e.   future) and  short-term  (i.e. immediate) effects. The effects occur not only as a result of   regular use, but even when used occasionally and in some cases, with exposure to passive   smoking. The table below lists the effects of tobacco:  
Short Term Health Effects  Long Term Health Effects 
Asthma  Eye problems like cataract  
Tooth decay/Gum disease  Cancers of oral cavity, larynx (voice box), oesophagus   (food pipe), lungs, stomach, throat and other cancers. 
Trouble breathing  Increased chances of Tuberculosis 
Bad breath  Heart Attack - Heart and blood vessel disease (stroke) 
High Blood Pressure; Diabetes; Kidney Damage 
Tobacco use in pregnancy leads to Low Birth Weight   babies  
Respiratory/Breathing problems 
Impotence and low fertility among men 

India’s Tobacco Cessation Programme  

In 2003, India introduced the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products Act (COTPA-2003).   According to this Act,  

l
  Smoking is completely banned in public places like hospitals, public transport like   buses, trains, taxis, schools and colleges, parks, etc. 

l
  Tobacco products cannot be sold to person below the age of 18 years. 

l
  Tobacco cannot be sold in places within 100 metres from the educational institutions   such as schools and colleges.  

l
  Ban of advertisements on tobacco through electronic and print media. 
The National Tobacco Control Programme (NTCP) is a programme launched by   Government of India in 2007 to increase public awareness about the harmful effects of  
