Principles of Drug Treatment for Hypertension 

The Medical Officer at the PHC will decide on the drug therapy for the patient. Whether a   person requires medicines for his high blood pressure and which medicine is best for the   patient would depend on: 

The blood pressure reading. 

Whether the high blood pressure has already affected the heart, kidneys, eyes and   blood vessels. 

Existing conditions such as diabetes, heart disease, kidney disease and other risk   factors like use of unhealthy dietary habits, lack of physical activity or low physical   activity, tobacco, alcohol, overweight and high levels of harmful blood fats.  

Other considerations will be age, sex (male/female) and body weight.  
There are several classes of medicines that can be used for the management of   hypertension, diabetes and common cancers. Every state has its Essential Drug List   (EDL) for common diseases available. The essential drugs for Hypertension, Diabetes   and Common Cancers are expected to be available at the PHC, CHC and higher heath   facilities. This essential drug list is updated on a regular basis and varies state-wise.  
Drugs for hypertension are available free of cost to those patients who use government   health facilities. The drugs are prescribed by the medical officer and the patient should be   given a month’s supply of drugs. The patient should be able to collect refills every month   from the nearest health facility. This could be a Sub-Centre (SC) or a Primary Health   Centre (PHC). 
The blood pressure reading should be monitored regularly. The frequency depends on   the advice of the medical officer. In some states, ASHA may also be given the digital   instruments to measure BP of those who are under treatment to make sure they are taking   their medication and their blood pressure is under control. 

Heart Attack 

A person who has hypertension is at risk for having a heart attack and stroke. These are   complications of hypertension. 
Heart attack is defined as severe chest pain for more than 30 minutes, radiating to left   arm and not relieved by pain killers. It is associated with nausea, vomiting and sweating. 

Risk factors of heart attack 

High blood pressure (hypertension). 

High blood glucose level (diabetes). 

Excess alcohol intake. 

Unhealthy foods. 

Smoking. 

Being overweight.  
