A glucometer is an instrument used to determine glucose levels in the blood.  

Process steps 
1. 
Wash your hands to prevent infection. 

2. 
Ask the participant to wash and dry their hands thoroughly. 

3. 
Place the glucometer on a flat surface. 

4. 
Open the lancet device provided with the glucometer.  

5. 
Insert the lancet. Take the sealing cap off the needle. Do not touch the needle. Close   the device. Set the spring of the device so that it is ready to use by pressing or pulling   the load button on the lancet device. 

6. 
Clean the fingertip of the subject prior to needle prick.  

7. 
Turn on the glucometer and place a test strip in the machine when the machine   is ready. One end will need to face the top of the glucometer; usually it has a dark   coloured line on it. This is where the blood will be placed for testing. Watch the   indicator for indication to place a blood drop onto the strip.  

8. 
Use a lancet to prick the side or top of the finger to get small amount of blood. Let the   blood flow freely from the fingertip; do not squeeze the finger. Squeezing the finger   can affect the results. Rubbing/Milking your finger before pricking it helps in easy   availability of a blood droplet for the meter.   

9. 
Place the drop of blood on the test strip. The blood drop is to be placed against the edge   or top of the strip. Wipe away the first drop of blood because it may be contaminated   with tissue fluid or debris.  

10. 
Apply cotton ball to subject’s finger and hold firmly until bleeding stops.  

11. 
Watch the glucometer screen. It should show a “waiting” or “processing” symbol, and   will produce a beep when the sample has been tested. The results will be displayed as   a number on the screen. 

12. 
Note the reading in the notebook or family folder of the subject. Keeping a record   will make it easier to identify the subjects who need referral, and for the doctor to   establish a good treatment plan.  

13. 
Turn the glucometer off.  

14. 
Place the used needle device into the sharps bin immediately. 

15. 
Dispose of test strip into clinical waste bin before removing gloves.  

16. 
If sharp bin and clinical waste bin are not available; then use two separate boxes   to store the sharp disposal and clinical waste products separately. After the blood   glucose test; these boxes need to be transferred to bio-hazard container. Always wear   gloves before transferring the bio-hazard products. (be alert to avoid needle pricks). 

17. 
Use an alcohol based wipe to clean the meter ensuring all external surfaces are clean. 

18. 
If the reading is high, then the individual should be referred to a medical professional   for check-up. 
