


The role of ASHA in addressing tobacco and alcohol as   risk factors 

So far your work has largely dealt with female members of the community   since you have worked mostly on women and childrens issues. However, as   you begin to work on NCDs, communicating with men on topics such as the   use of tobacco and alcohol is important. This may at first seem difficult. This is   perhaps more in areas where there are barriers for open discussions between   women and men. It is important for you to more actively seek the participation   of members of the Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee or   members of the Mahila Arogya Samiti or other community groups, such as   -  youth groups, SHG groups, etc. Your key tasks are to:  
1. Increase community awareness about the harmful effects of tobacco and   alcohol to their health and the health of those around them.  
2. Improve understanding of the money spent on tobacco and alcohol use and   the likely costs of treatment needed if they were to fall ill.  
3. Ensure that children and adolescents - both boys and girls are also aware   regarding the effects of tobacco and alcohol use. The platform of adolescent   meeting and Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) can be used to   disseminate these messages. 
4. Work with individuals who use tobacco and alcohol and motivate them to   quit these habits by explaining the harmful consequences of tobacco and   alcohol use. Request the Male Multipurpose worker/ASHA Facilitator or   male volunteers in your community to support you.  
5. Work with the VHSNC to undertake community activities to see how   many young people use tobacco and alcohol and share this information in   community. With the VHSNC you can organise community action against   the availability of tobacco and alcohol - like set-up of shops, illegal supply and   production of tobacco and alcohol in the community. This demands building   solidarity and support for this cause from various womens groups, other   ASHAs, panchayat/ULB members, recognised healthcare providers etc. 
6. Identify tobacco cessation centres and de-addiction centres that are in your   area and provide information to people about how to access these centres.  
7. Mobilise on a priority basis, those who consume tobacco and alcohol to   attend screening for Non-Communicable Diseases. Support those with   hypertension and diabetes and motivate them to give up these habits. 
