Your first task is to list all women and men who are 30 years of age and above. Normally   in a population of 1000 you will have about 370 people in this age group. (182 women and   188 men). This list is to be updated every 6 months. You will enter into your diary or health   register the names, ages and sex of these individuals. (a format is attached at Annexure 1).   Over time, these records will become available in an electronic format. You will be given a   specific register or folder in which to record this information. The information is then to   be given to the ANM who manages the sub centre of your area. 

2. Completion of Community Based Assessment Checklist 

Completion of Community Based Assessment Checklist  (CBAC) for NCD screening   through home visits. The next task is to complete a CBAC (Annexure 2) for all in this age   category. This form is intended to capture information related to age, family history, waist   circumference, and risky behaviours such as lack of physical activity, use of/or exposure   to tobacco and alcohol. The CBAC also includes questions related to symptoms for cancer   cervix, breast cancer, oral cancer, etc. The checklist will help you remember the key risk   factors, identify those who must be prioritised to attend the screening camp and refer the   individuals with symptoms to the nearest health facility where a Medical Officer is available. 
When are completing the tool, please remember if a person responds, yes to any   question in CBAC, it does  not  mean that they have the disease. Also, if somebody says   no in response to a question it does not mean that they do not have the disease. The   important thing for you to remember is that everybody (of 30 years and above) must be   screened. You should also know that if an individual has a low score on the CBAC, this   does not mean that they do not need screening. However, those with high risk scores on   the CBAC should be strongly urged to get screened. 
There is also a section in the form in which you must enter details of exposure to smoke   which is not related to tobacco. This tells you about the risk of people to respiratory   diseases. 
You should also be careful to not create panic or scare in the community about these   disease conditions. The checklist itself does not diagnose a patient with disease. You must  

Community Based Assessment Checklist (CBAC) 
