
Process steps 

A. How to apply the cuff 

Ask the individual to remove all clothing that covers the location of cuff placement.   When necessary, roll up the sleeves of the subject’s clothing. 

Ensure the hand is relaxed. Place one arm of the participant on the table with the   palm facing upward. Always use the same arm for blood pressure readings, as each   arm will give you a slightly different reading. 

Make sure the arm cuff is properly deflated (air is out) before placing it around the   patient’s upper arm. 

Ensure that the cuff is the correct size for the individual. If required use a smaller or   larger cuff. 

Wrap the cuff comfortably or snugly around the upper arm, and tie it up properly with   the velcro tape. 

Make sure the whole cuff is above the elbow, about 2cm (or 2 finger breadths) from   the elbow. 

Keep the level of the cuff at the same level as the heart during measurement. Make   sure that the tubing falls over the front centre of the arm, so that the centre is correctly   placed. 
B. Recording blood pressure by using the digital blood pressure instrument 

Press the START/STOP button to begin taking blood pressure measurement. 

The BP cuff will start bloating up. This will compress the arm a bit and the patient may   complain of pain. Reassure the patient that the pain is temporary. 

The cuff will start to inflate and then slowly deflate so that the machine can take the   measurement. 

When the reading is complete, the blood pressure giving systolic and diastolic   readings and pulse rate will appear on the screen. 

If the monitor/machine does not record the reading, re-position the cuff and try again   after 1-2 minutes and repeat the steps as mentioned above.  

Record the reading either in the machine or in family card of the person. 

It is suggested to take a minimum of 2 readings at interval of 1 minute. The average of   those readings should be used to represent the patient’s blood pressure. 

Additional readings should be taken if the difference between the first two is greater   than 5 mm Hg, and then the average of these multiple readings is used. 

Press the START/STOP button to turn the machine off. 
