

The role of ASHA in helping an individual reduce weight 

Motivate the individual who is overweight to make a firm decision to lose   weight and change lifestyle to become healthier. 

Help her/him make small changes in lifestyle, for example if she/he is   eating three chapattis, reduce to two or one gradually.  

Encourage the family members and friends to provide support and   motivation to the overweight individual. 

Advise her/him to reduce the amount of fried foods, foods rich in sugar   and fat in their diets. 

Explain that they should not resort to misleading measures that promise   weight loss in a short term; pills,  churan , mixtures, surgeries etc. 

Motivate them to avoid consuming tobacco and drinking alcohol.  

Encourage them to incorporate regular physical exercise in their daily   routine.  

Regular follow-up with the individual is required to monitor changes in   their weight or any related health conditions. 

Place the tape firmly in a horizontal position making sure the measuring tape is   parallel to the floor and not folded or twisted. 

Record the reading at the end of the normal expiration/breathing. 

The tape should be loose enough to allow the ASHA to place one finger between the   tape and the persons body but the tape should fit firmly but comfortably around the   waist. The tape should not squeeze the skin. 

Look at the place on the tape where the zero end meets the other end of the tape   measure. The location of this meeting point is the waist measurement.  

Record the measurement in cms to the nearest 0.0 or 0.5 cm in the individuals card or   your register. Example - If the exact measurement is 85.7 cm, it should be recorded as   85.5 cm and if it is 85.9 cm, then record the reading as 86 cm. 

Benefits of Reducing Weight  

The reduction of weight lowers the risk of 

Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs)  heart diseases, stroke. 

 H igh blood sugar  Diabetes. 

Harmful blood fats. 

 High blood pressure  Hypertension. 

Sleeping disorders. 
