

What is a Healthy Diet?  

In Modules 6 and 7 you have learnt about nutrition of the child and pregnant woman. In   this module, you will learn how healthy eating habits are important in preventing and   controlling non-communicable diseases. 
There are four basic food groups listed in the table below. Eating foods from all food   groups is called Dietary Diversity. It means that foods from all the basic four food groups   should be eaten in proper quantities.  
The quantity of foods needed to meet body requirements differ with age, gender, body   composition and physical activity. Thus those who engage in heavy work need to eat   more, but those who do not do much activity need lower quantities. Many traditional   foods that are fibre-rich like whole products -  wheat (atta products), jowar, bajra, maize,   unhusked dals (with chilka), fruits and vegetables constitute a Healthy Diet. Eating such   foods also helps to maintain a healthy body weight and reduces the risk of NCDs. Some   Non-Communicable Diseases require food restrictions. People suffering from NCDs   require specific dietary advice. 

2.2: Healthy Diet and Physical Activity 

2.2.1. Healthy Diet 

In this Section,  you will learn about: 

l
 Classification of Food Groups with examples. 

l
 Difference between a Healthy and an Unhealthy Diet. 

l
 Effects of an Unhealthy Diet. 

l
 How to make Healthy Food Choices. 

l
 How Unhealthy Food Choices are due to lack of Information or Poverty,   rather than Availability. 

Classification of Food Groups with examples 

Food Group  Examples* 
Cereals, Millets and Pulses  Cereals - Wheat, wheat flour ( atta/maida ), rice   (brown/white), rice flakes ( chiwra ), maize/corn,   barley, oats,  suji , vermicelli ( sevian ), puffed rice,   etc.;  
Millets -  Bajra, Ragi, Jowar ;  
Pulses/dals and legumes - Bengal gram ( channa   dal ), Bengal gram flour ( besan ), green gram   ( moong dal ), black gram ( urad dal ), arhar dal   ( tur dal ) chickpea (white/black/green  chana ),   sprouted pulses, legumes like rajma,  lobia ,   soyabean and its products, etc. 
