34 
Leadership Style 
People adopt different leadership styles. The two common styles are 

Authoritarian 

Participatory 
Authoritarian leaders do not come forward for cooperation or collaboration.  They are heavily task-oriented people. They expect people to do what they  are told without question or debate. They  are usually intolerant of what they  do not agree with. It is difficult for community members to contribute their  views or empower themselves under this kind of leadership. 
A participatory leader creates a positive environment in which all members  can reach their highest potential. They encourage the community to reach  the set goals as effectively as possible, while also working tirelessly to  strengthen the bonds among various members. They usually form and lead  some of the most productive teams. 
As an ASHA, it is the most appropriate to adopt a participatory leadership  style. Some of the characteristics of participatory leadership are given below: 

Leaders establish goals and set the direction 

As an ASHA you need to articulate what is an achievable goal in your village.  You should establish your goal and direction by involving your community as to  how, where and when it would be completed. 
For example, there should not be any maternal death in the coming year in  your village, or, All children of your village should be immunised in the next six  months. 

Leaders affirm and articulate values 

As leaders we need to have certain values like honesty, hardwork,  trusteworthiness etc. You have to demonstrate these values in your actions.  You may communicate to your community members that you are hardworking  but if you do not show it in your actions people will not believe you. 
For example, you are aware that every eligible child in the village needs to be  fully immunised. But when the ANM comes for immunisation you are not  present.Then will people believe that you are a hardworking person? 

Leaders have high standards and high expectations 

As an ASHA you should be firm about receiving high quality health care  services from the sub-centre and the PHC for your village community. 
Make sure that the ANM performs her role professionally. As an ASHA you  should also provide her support to carry out her role effectively. For example, 
