
Part A 

Child Health & Nutrition 
31 

Fast breathing  Pneumonia 
 
Give Cotrimoxazole for 5 days. (2 Paediatric tablets twice   daily for a child from 2 up to 12 months and 3 tablets twice   daily for a child from 12 months up to 5 years.  

Follow-up in 2 days. 

If improving, advise home care and tablets to continue.  

If no improvement, insist on referral. 
No signs of   pneumonia or very   severe disease 
Cough or Cold 

Advise home care for cough or cold.  
 
If coughing for more than 30 days, refer for assessment. 

Home Management for Common Cold or Cough 
Keep the young child warm and away from the draught. 
If the childs nose is blocked and this is interfering with feeding, clean the   nose by pu ing in nose drops (boiled and cooled glass of water mixed   with pinch of salt) and by cleaning the nose with a so  co on wick. 
Breastfeed frequently and for longer period at each feed. Exclusively   breastfeed for six months. 
Child should continue to be given normal diet during cough and cold.   This is important as this will prevent malnutrition and also help the child   to recover from illness. 
In case the child is not able to take the normal quantities of food, s/he   should be given small quantities of food frequently. 
Child can also be given foods of thicker consistency such as khichari,   dalia, sooji or rice in milk, idli etc.. 
Small quantities of oil/ghee should be added to the food to provide extra   energy.  
A er the illness, at least one extra meal should be given to the child for at   least a week to help the child in speedy recovery. 
Give increased amounts of  uids. 
Give extra  uids (as much as the child will take), such as dal soup,   vegetable soup, plain clean water or other locally available  uids.  
Always feed from a cup or spoon. Never use a bo le. 
For babies over six months of age, soothe the throat and relieve the cough   with a safe home-made cough remedy (made into a tea) such as: 

Give Cotrimoxazole for 5 days. (2 Paediatric tablets twice  
daily for a child from 2 up to 12 months and 3 tablets twice  
daily for a child from 12 months up to 5 years.  
If improving, advise home care and tablets to continue. 
If no improvement, insist on referral. 
Advise home care for cough or cold.  
If coughing for more than 30 days, refer for assessment. 
Note: If the child is sleeping and has cough or difficult breathing, count the   number of breaths first before you try to wake the child. 
