
ASHA Module 7 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
8 

It is easier to prevent a child from slipping into malnutrition than to   reverse it once it is severely underweight. Hence, the focus should be on   counselling every family with a young child below one year of age, because   it is this time, especially in the age of 6 to 18 months that most children   become malnourished. 

Recognising Malnutrition 
It is di  cult to recognise malnutrition just by looking at a child. Only very   severe cases would show obvious signs of weakness or wasting by which time   it is too late. Most children look normal but their height and weight when   measured is less than expected for their age. It is therefore essential to weigh   every child monthly, so as to detect malnutrition in time. Depending on the   weight the child can be classi ed as mild, moderate or servely underweight. 
Sick children need special a ention. However, families of all children especially   children below two should be counselled on feeding the child so as to prevent   malnutrition. 

Six Important Messages for Preventing Child Malnutrition 
1.  Exclusive Breastfeeding:  Till the age of six months, give only breast milk;   not even water should be added.  
2.  Complementary Feeding:  At the age of six months, add other foods.   Breastfeeding alone is not enough, though it is good to continue   breastfeeding for at least one to two years more. There are  ve things to   remember about complementary feeding:  (i) Consistency: Initially the food has to be so  and mashed. But later,   anything that adults eat can be given to the child, with less spices. Do   not dilute food. Keep it as thick as possible, for e.g. give daal not daal   ka pani. 
(ii) Quantity: Gradually increase the amount of such foods. Till at about   one year, the child gets almost half as much nutrition as the mother. 
(iii) Frequency: The amount of complementary foods given should be equal   to about half what the adult needs in terms of nutrients. But since the   childs stomach is small, this amount has to be distributed into  four to    ve, even six feeds per day .  
(iv) Density: The food also has to be energy dense, low in volume, high in   energy, therefore,  add some oil or fats to the food . Family could add a   spoon of it to every roti/every meal. Whatever edible oil is available in   the house is su  cient. 
(v) Variety: Add protective foods  green leafy vegetables. The rule is that the   greener it is, or the more red it is the more its protective quality. Similarly   meat, eggs,  sh are liked by children and very nutritive and protective.    
3  Feeding during the illness:  Give as much as the child will take; do not   reduce the quantity of food. A er the illness, to catch up with growth, add   an extra-feed. Recurrent illness is a major cause of malnutrition.  
