21 
own educational institutions. In doing so, they may preserve and develop their  own culture. 

Right to Constitutional Remedies 

This right empowers citizens to approach the court in cases of denial of any  of the Fundamental Rights. The court of law stands as a guard against the  violation of these rights. 
Under this right, it is the duty of the Judiciary to attend to all complaints  pertaining to violation or rights. 

Directive Principles 

Apart from these there are some Directive Principles of State Policy that  incorporate such rights as are required for the overall development of human  kind. 

These Principles include rights like the right to work, right to equal wage  for equal work, right to an adequate livelihood, right to free and  compulsory education of children up to the age of 14 years etc. 

The state should take measures to preserve the good health of labourers  and minor children and to ensure that they are not forced to undertake  any work that harms their health. 

The state should promote public health and animal husbandry. 

Decentralisation of power should reach the grassroots level. For that,  Panchayati Raj must be established. 

The state should protect the academic and economic benefits of the  weaker sections. Not only that, various programmes should be undertaken  for the development of these people. In addition to that, free legal  assistance should be extended to the economically weaker sections of  society to help get them justice. 
Think about the following statements and decide whether your Human and  communitys Fundamental Rights are protected. 

My village is safe and secure.  All members of the community receive equal  treatment and information about different government schemes and  opportunities so as to avail of these services. 

My village provides all its inhabitants equal access to resources, especially  water, irrespective of their caste, sex and religion. 

Whenever someone violates the rights of another person, the village  committee takes note of it, discusses and takes appropriate decision and  action with the consent of all the committee members, keeping in view the  policies and procedures of the committee. 
