12 
The next day one hundred of the women gathered together. They went to  the outskirts of the village and stopped a toddy-cart.‘You cannot come into  the village’, they told the cart driver strongly in unison and stood in front  of it. ‘Throw all the toddy away.’ Each of them offered him a rupee to do  so.The driver got scared and left the village. 
Then a jeep with arrack packs arrived. The women surrounded it and  demanded that it returned without unloading the arrack. After two days the  police were called. They said that all those who bid at auctions have the  right to sell arrack.The women stood unmoved. They said that they would  go to the Collector and will not keep quiet if arrack was sold in their  village. The arrack contractors got cold feet. They made several plans, but  nothing worked and they gave up. 
These events gave strength to the women. All this happened only because  the women united and struggled strongly to get rid of arrack from their  village. 
The story of Dubagunta spread in the form of an agitation to other parts of  the district. 
In the literacy classes of other villages teachers started sensitising the  community through puppet shows about the problems caused by arrack. They  also shared the story of Dubagunta village. 
Women of other villages had also suffered a lot. There were quarrels every  day in their families.They survived only by taking refuge in neighbouring  houses. Daily, for two-three hours they had to put up with this situation.  There was not enough food for their children. So, women in other villages  considered doing in their village what the women in Dubagunta had done  earlier. The members of three literacy centres discussed this issue. The  teachers supported and guided them. Finally, they also attacked the arrack  shops. 
They too managed to stop the arrack business in their village.The women in  Dubagunta initiated and led a movement in which women from other  villages joined and ultimately the situation changed for the better. 
Chipko Movement 
The Chipko Movement was initiated in the Uttarakhand region of India by a  group of villagers who opposed the commercial cutting down of trees. The  movement was led by women who were influenced by Mahatma Gandhi. 
For rural women, saving the environment is crucial to their economic  survival. As primary food, fuel and water gatherers, women have strong  interests in reversing deforestation, desertification and water pollution.  The women made a living in the Himalayan foothills, using its forests as  sources of food and fuel. They faced a particularly severe challenge in the 
