
Part A 

Child Health & Nutrition 
9 

4  Prevent illness:  Recurrent illness is a major cause of malnutrition. There are   six important things to remember which could prevent illness:  (a)  Handwashing:  before feeding the child, before preparing the childs   food, and a er cleaning up the child who has passed stools. This is the   single most useful measure to prevent recurrent diarrhoea. 
(b)  Drinking water to be boiled . Though useful for everyone, it is of   particular importance to the malnourished child with recurrent diarrhoea.  
(c)  Full immunisation of the child:  Tuberculosis, diphtheria, pertussis and   measles are all prevented by immunisation and are the diseases that cause   severe malnutrition. In malnourished children, these diseases are more   common and life threatening, than in normal children. 
(d)  Vitamin A:  To be given along with measles vaccine in the ninth month   and then repeated once every six months till  ve years of age. This too   reduces infections and night blindness, all of which is more common in   malnourished children. 
(e)  Avoid persons with infections,  especially with a cough and cold picking   up the child, and handling the child, or even coming near the child during   the illness. This does not apply to mother, but even she should be more   rigorous in handwashing and more careful in handling the baby. 
(f)  Preventing Malaria:  In districts with malaria the baby should sleep under   an insecticide treated bed net. Malaria too is a major cause of malnutrition.  

You should encourage parents and other family members to spend time with   the child as it matters a lot. Time has to be spent in feeding the child. Time has   to be spent in playing and talking with the child. Such children eat and absorb   food better. 

5  Access to health services 

Access to health services makes for prompt treatment of illness.   On the very  rst day of the illness, if you help the mother decide   on whether it is a minor illness for which home remedy would be   adequate, or to be re rered to a doctor, such a decision would save   lives. Early treatment would prevent malnutrition. 

Access to contraceptive services is important. If the age of mother is   less than 19, or the gap between two children is less than three years,   there is a much higher chance of the children being malnourished.  
6  Access to anganwadi services 

The anganwadi provides a food supplement for the child up to the   age of 5. This could be a cooked meal, or in the form of take  home   rations. Malnourished children are to be given additional food   supplements. For children below the age of two, take  home rations  
