
13 

in the market. Our ANM and PHCs have supply of   MALA-N. You could keep a supply of these pills.  

How to use OC  
Start the pill from any of first seven days of start   of menstrual bleeding and continue until the pack   finishes. Start a new pack again. Taken regularly,   the pill is almost 100 percent effective in preventing   pregnancy. These pills do not cause abortion. 
If a woman forgets a day’s dose she should take   both the missed and regular tablets together. But one must not miss it   for more than two days. If missed for two days, advise her to take pills   as soon as she remembers. She can continue taking the pill each day   until the pack is finished and also use a condom for sex until seven   hormonal pills are taken in a row. 
You should always mention about the common side effects of oral   contraceptives such as nausea, mild headache, tenderness of breasts,   spotting between periods and sometimes-irregular periods. Explain that   these side effects are not signs of any serious disease. These usually   become less or stop in three months.  
You should help women in getting examined by ANM/Medical Officer,   before starting oral pills. You should give monthly supplies to women who   have started oral pills after consultation with ANM/Medical Officer. 

Emergency Contraceptive Pills (ECP) 
Emergency contraceptive pills are pills to be taken within 72 hours of   unprotected sex. These pills are taken only in some emergency situations.   These pills are especially useful for those women who have been subjected   to unprotected sex, slippage or bursting of condoms during sex or sexual   violence. 
These pills are to be taken as soon as possible after   unprotected sexual exposure preferably within 72 hours.   These pills will also not work if the woman is already   pregnant. She should take two tablets within an interval   of 12 hours.  

PREVENTING UNWANTED PREGNANCIES  

Take the first tablet as soon as possible   within 72 hours of unprotected sex. 
Take the second tablet 12 hours   after you take the first tablet. 
