
ASHA Module 6 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
48 

d. Learning proper hand washing  You must make sure that your hands are washed properly with soap before   touching the baby. You should also teach the mother and family members to   wash their hands before touching the baby. 
(Please see Annexe 7 for skills checklist for hand washing) 
e. Learning how to measuring temperature   You should measure the temperature of the newborn using a special   thermometer to see if the body temperature is normal or if baby has   hypothermia (colder than normal).  
( Please see Annexe 8 for skills checklist for measuring temperature) 
f. Learn how to weigh the new born  Baby should be weighed within two days of birth. 
It is important to weigh the baby a er birth because babies may require   special care on the basis of the birth weight. 
It is bet er to use a special colour-coded weighing machine meant just for   weighing newborn which records the weight as green, yellow or red.  
(Please see Annexe 7,8 & 9 for skills checklist) 

If the babys weight is in the green zone: babys weight is normal and can   be managed with normal care as described above. 

If in the yellow zone, the baby is mildly under weight, but can be managed   at home with extra care as given below. (below 2.5 kg but above 1.8 kg). 

If in the red coloured zone, this means that the baby is very small and   must be referred to the health centre. These babies also need extra care   as given below.   (less than 1.8 kg) 

g. Learn how to take care of babies less than 2.5 kg  Babies whose weight is in the yellow or red zone are small and require extra   care as follows:  Provide extra warmth. 
Family should ensure. 
 
Baby is wrapped well with thin sheets and blankets. 
 
The head is covered to prevent heat loss. 
 
The baby is kept very close to the mothers abdomen and chest. 
 
 Warm water  lled bo les wrapped in cloth may be kept on either side   of the babys blankets, when not being kept close to the mothers body. 
 
The baby must be fed more frequently.  
