
25 

homoeopathic medicines for iron deficiency anaemia are given below with   their indications. 

Arsenic album: Anaemia due to malaria, excessive prostration, oedema,   violent and irregular palpitation. 

Calcarea carbonicum: Palpitation & tachycardia, vertigo, anorexia,   nausea, eructation; Pale, weak fatigue, lassitude, easily tired; Headache   and heaviness at morning, profuse sweating on head. 

China: Chief remedy for anaemia resulting from loss of fluids, as in   lactation or haemorrhage, or from all exhausting discharges, such as   menstrual flow, long-lasting diarrhoea. 

Ferrum metallicum: Paleness of the face and puffiness of the extremities,   weakness, easily exhausted. 

Ferrum phosphoricum: Anaemia and chlorosis; it removes the underlying   dyscrasia giving rise to the anaemic or chlorotic conditions and cures   the trouble. 

Kali carbonicum: Anaemia after loss of fluid or vitality; Pallor; Aversion   to be alone; Backache, weakness, profuse menses, irregular with clots,   weak before menstruation; Backache; Vertigo. 

Natrum muriaticum: Anaemic and debilitated conditions due to loss   of fluids, especially in women who suffer from menstrual disorders. 

Phosphorus: Anaemia; Morning diarrhoea; Restlessness; Weakness   and prostration; Nervousness, debility and trembling; Nausea and   vomiting. 

Pulsatilla: Anaemic condition produced by large or continued doses of   iron; System is relaxed and worn out; Patient suffering from gastric   and menstrual derangements. 
Some Unani medicines are also commonly used for supplementing iron in   pregnant ladies, mothers and children. Sharbat-e-Faulad 15ml. twice daily   is indicated for pregnant ladies and mothers. In children the medicine   could be given in the dose of 5 ml. twice daily. Qurs-e-Damvi two tablets   with butter is also useful for this purpose. 
Iron deficiency disorders can be managed as well as prevented by a proper   intake of iron rich natural foods & the intake of foods, which enhances   the absorption and utilization of iron from the intake of foodstuffs. 

AYUSH 
