
ASHA Module 6 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
28 

3. Management of Anaemia 

In India, anaemia among women is very common. The chances of a mother   having a delivery before term, or even dying are higher among mothers   with severe anaemia. In order to make sure that all women have good iron   stores, all pregnant women should be given iron tablets, even if they are not   anaemic. Anaemia can be detected by a simple blood test, which measures   the amount of a pigment called Haemoglobin (Hb). Low levels of Hb mean   that the woman has anaemia (see box below). The test should be performed   during the antenatal check-up. This can be done at the VHND by the ANM.  

Haemoglobin level  Degree of anaemia 
More than 11 g/dl  Absence of anaemia/Normal 
7-11 g/dl  Moderate anaemia 
Less than 7 g/dl  Severe anaemia 

If a woman during the time of pregnancy has Hb level below 11g/dl, she is   considered to be su ering from anaemia.  
Common symptoms of severe anaemia include: 
 Very pale tongue 
 Weakness 
 General swelling in body.  

For women who do not have anaemia (Hb more than 11 g/dl) 
The pregnant woman should take one tablet of IFA every day for at least 100   days (prophylactic dose), starting a er the  rst trimester, at least 14-16 weeks   of gestation to prevent anaemia. This dosage regimen is to be repeated again   for three months a er the delivery. 
If a woman is found to be anaemic:   The woman should be given two IFA tablets per day for three months.   This means that a pregnant woman with anaemia needs to take at least   200 tablets of IFA. Besides taking IFA tablets, you should encourage the   pregnant woman, where possible, to increase her dietary intake of iron-  rich food. 
 The Hb level should be estimated again a er one month. If the level   increases, you should tell the woman to continue with two tablets of IFA   daily until the Hb comes to normal. If the Hb does not rise in spite of   taking IFA tablets, in the prescribed dose, you should refer the woman   to the nearest facility that is equipped to manage complications in   pregnancy. 
 You should refer women with severe anaemia immediately to the nearest   PHC/CHC/DH for further treatment. Such women may need injections or   blood transfusions.  
