
Part D 

Introduction to Infectious Diseases 
61 

Ways of controlling malaria : There are two ways: 
Do not allow mosquitoes to multiply :  Spraying insecticide where mosquitoes sit when they   come to bite inside the houses. 
Drying up breeding pits. 
Not allowing water to stagnate- pouring a spoon of   oil over the water surface in small collections. This is   enough to kill the mosquito larvae.  
Enable cultivation of Gambusia  sh in ponds and   wells- these eat up the mosquito larvae. Also remove   the grass from banks of pond. Larvae  nd it di  cult   to breed if there is no vegetation and the pond edges   are vertical.  
Water in drains and canals should not be allowed to remain stagnant in   one place and it should be  ushed and cleaned once in a week. 
Do not allow mosquitoes to bite  Clothes that cover the body, like full sleeved shirts.  
Mosquito nets treated with   insecticides so that infected   mosquitoes do not reach the sleeping   person. The mosquitoes coming in   contact with the net may die later.  
Use of mosquito repellent, e.g.   burning neem leaves to drive   mosquitoes away. 

The Role of ASHA in Prevention and Management of Malaria 
i.   During house visits and in the village meetings you should inform   the community about malaria, how to prevent it and what to do for   fever. You should also inform the community of the services you can   provide for malaria and request that for any case of fever you should be   contacted. 
ii.   Encourage and help the village health and sanitation commi ee and the   womens groups or other community organisations to take appropriate   collective action to prevent malaria in that area.  
iii. Where possible, ask those with fever, who you suspect of having malaria   to go to the primary health centre. You should facilitate this. It is only if   the patient cannot go the same day, that you should take on the task of   diagnosis and treatment of the suspected patient with malaria till such   time as the quali ed service provider is accessed.  
