
26 
READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 

Iron rich foods  
Green leafy vegetables, spinach, ragi, jaggery, drumstick, dates raisins, amla   and figs etc. For enhancing the absorption of iron, one must take whole   grams, sprouts, fresh fruits and fresh raw vegetables. Intake of tea, coffee   and other preservatives in the food interfere in the absorption of iron. So   by avoiding all the beverages, we can enhance the iron absorption.  

Diseases of gastro-intestinal system 
Gastro-intestinal system plays an important role in the normal and   abnormal states of health. Ayurveda describe that the use of wholesome   diet is the only factor that promotes the healthy growth of man. Food   should be taken at proper time, when the body feels light after the   digestion of previous meals, after the clearance of bowels and urine and   when the mind is free from worries. Clean and hygienic food should be   taken in optimum quantity. The food should not be too hot or too cold,   too heavy or too light.  
Diseases of the gastro-intestinal system are primarily caused by the food   and water that we take. The root causes of many chronic diseases are   also related to factors derived from partially digested or undigested food   materials. Therefore, the disorders arising from gastro-intestinal tract   should be promptly managed. If digestive capacity is low simple remedies   like ‘Trikatu’ and ‘Panchakola’ powders 2 gms.twice daily are indicated   for use along with warm water before meals. In abdominal pain due to   indigestion, Hinguvachadi Churna, Lashunadi Vati, Chitrakadi Vati etc. is   indicated in the dose of two tablets twice daily with warm water. 
Constipation is a common symptom of many illnesses, which can be   managed by powder of ‘Triphala’ (equal quantity of fruits of amla, harada   and baheda) 5 gms. with tepid water at bedtime. 8-10 dried grapes of   bigger variety boiled with about 250 ml. of milk is also indicated at   bedtime for relieving constipation. 
Unani medicines are widely used for the management of abdominal   distension and gastritis. Qurs-e-Tankar or Qurs-e-Kabid is indicated one   tablet twice daily in this condition. Qurs-e-Alkali one tablet twice daily   may be used as an antacid. In non-specific diarrhoea Qurs-e-Zaheer one   tablet twice daily is useful. In case of amoebiasis Qurs-e-Deedau one   tablet twice daily is indicated. 
