
25  Maternal Health 

Part B 

Emphasise the importance of a balanced and nutritious diet during   pregnancy. The diet of the pregnant woman should contain a mix of   cereals, pulses (including beans and nuts), vegetables including greens,   milk, eggs, meat and ﬁ sh. If possible, the family should be encouraged to   add oils, jaggery and fruits to the diet. Meat and nuts are especially good   for anaemic women. You should explain to the mother and family that no   foods should be forbidden during pregnancy.  
See when ANC is due for each check-up and remind them appropriately. 
Escort pregnant woman to VHND where they are hesitant or need such   support. 
Ensure that all components of ANC are delivered. 
Ensure that the Maternal Card is updated. 

Planning for a Safe Delivery 
You should 
Know how to calculate the EDD and communicate this to the pregnant woman. 

Know which institutions in the area provide different levels of care and establish linkages with   providers there.  

At least once before delivery, take the pregnant woman to this centre and introduce her to the   providers. 

Know what transport is available  _  whether funded by the state or other private means  _  that is easily   accessible and affordable and how to call on it when the need arises. 

Assist all pregnant women and families to prepare plans for birth: including identifying funding   sources should money be required at short notice. Sometimes Self-Help Groups (SHGs) may advance   money in emergency even if the woman is not a member. This is most important for women in remote   hamlets, or in communities which are currently not availing of institutional delivery or those at high   risk for complications.  

Know what records (BPL card) need to be carried to the institution. 

Share birth plans with ANM and PHC MO at the VHND or monthly meeting. 

Identify mothers with complications, or a high likelihood of developing complications with support   from the ANM. Inform them of the institutions that it is most advisable for them to go to and motivate   the mother and the family to go there and escort them if required.  
