
Example: Development of a plan for tackling sanitation problem in village 
Let village teachers, Nursedidi, Anganwadi behen, artisans, Panchayat members,  NGO workers meet and form a core group. You will be one of the members of  this group. 
This group should go around village observing village sanitation and other  problems. You may involve students in village rally so as to raise awareness of  sanitation issues inform about time and venue of planning meeting. Songs and  street plays also invite attention of people. 
Then gather in a central place open to all. Draw a village map on a big paper or  a wall. Ask people to draw their house in the map. Map waste water cesspools  in village. Discuss about problems. The village planning may take 2-3 days also. 
Ask people sources of wastewater flowing in the street or in cesspools. Mark  the house with things like tamarind seeds, small stones etc. Mark houses having  fever cases. The Nursedidi, and the Anganwadi behen and MPW will check the  houses. They will discuss about malaria with villagers and talk of solutions.  Think of solutions to eliminate breeding sites for mosquitoes. You can handle  more problems in the same meeting. Think of handling problem of malnutrition  amongst children in your village and how such exercises can be useful. 

Communication for health behaviour change 
Health information and communication is more important than pills and  injections. Proper information and advice help people to avoid diseases and  stay healthy. 
Health information is a lasting asset. Currently villagers especially poor women,  men and adolescents do not have access to information on health issues. You  can fill this gap and act as a local resource on health issues. Availability of  information will trigger changes in health promoting behaviours and adoption  of healthy practices. 

We should select issues close to peoples hearts and needs. Attend to more  important problems first. 

See what people already know and build on existing knowledge base. 

Understand the problems from their viewpoint also. 

Share health information with them and find possible actions. 
9 
ASHA: MY EIGHT TASKS 
