
health of woman, Pregnancy on account of rape and When there is risk that  child is born will suffer from deformities and diseases. 
However, selection of sex of foetus is illegal and abortion should not be sought  eliminating female fetuses. 

Contraceptive needs 
Many couple dont want more children.They also want some years gap between  children They are not using contraceptives for various reasons. You can help  them in meeting their contraceptive needs. Planned pregnancies and births can  add to the joy of life. Couples can plan it with help of safe days and other  contraceptive methods. Spacing between two children keeps mother and  children healthy. 
Contraception methods are available to prevent and space pregnancies.  Preventing unwanted births is a right of every woman and couple. We should  try and meet this unmet need. 

Reversible contraceptive methods 
We have temporary (reversible) and permanent contraceptive (sterilization)  methods. In the next chapter we will talk about condoms for men. 
Use of condom by the husband is the easiest options for spacing between  two children. Condom is a rubber balloon available at PHC or SC Health  workers, or at the common village shops. You will also have condoms in your  kits. It prevents entry of seeds present in semen. Condoms also prevents  infections in genital tract of women and men. Condom should be removed  carefully after each intercourse to avoid leakage. If not used properly this  method may fail. 
IuD  is a device used for spacing. It is inserted in the uterus. Doctor or nurse  puts an IUD in uterus after proper examination. This method is most  reliable. Proper selection of a woman is necessary for IUD. There are  other temporary contraceptives available for regulating interval between  two births. 
Oral pills:  woman has to take one tablet daily for 28 days. Injectable  contraceptives are also available with private practitioners. We will know about  these methods soon. 
65 
PREVENTING UNWANTED REGNANCIES 
