27 

Block Level 

Community Health Centres (CHCs) are located at the block level. They provide  services similar to that provided by PHCs, in addition to the following health  services: 

Well-equipped medium-sized hospital to handle emergencies related to  Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) and National Health Programmes. 

Specialist treatment of endemic diseases like Dengue, Hemorrhagic fever,  Cerebral Malaria, etc. 

Routine surgical procedures and simple operations. 

Essential and emergency obstetric care, and 24-hour services for normal  and assisted deliveries. 

Specialised Family Planning (FP) services, Laproscopic, Gynaecological and  safe abortion services. 

Counselling and treatment of RTI/STIs. 

Basic routine pathological tests with advanced tests for some diseases  as blood transfusion, and testing and treatment of drinking water sources. 

Preventing/managing epidemics and outbreaks. 

State Level 

At state-level policies, plans and programmes are formulated based on the  information and research regarding the health needs and problems of the  people. Appropriate budgets for those services, materials and human  resources are allocated. 
Quality of care:  Now you know about the health services which are available  at these different levels. As an ASHA you need to be well-versed with services  available at the Sub-Centre and the PHC. Knowing only about the services is  also not enough. Under the Rural Health Mission great emphasis is being put  on the quality of health care. As an ASHA you need to make sure that your  community members receive quality health care. There are certain norms  which need to be followed by the health service providers and health care  service institutions provide quality care to patients. Generally, patients do not  know about these. As a result, they often get poor quality services. 

Quality Health Care is a Right of the Community 

A professionally trained and certified person has to take history and  examine the patient. 

The patient is to be given appropriate/adequate information related to the  diagnosis, treatment procedures and drugs prescribed without scaring  or causing undue tension. 
