16 
Some examples of values which are required for social development include: 

1. Value of Equality 

In a patriarchal society women are viewed as submissive, weak and soft  and men as strong and powerful. Due to this thinking men are given more  recognition, power and respect in the family and society whereas women  are usually viewed in a supportive role. As a result, girls and woman have  less access to resources. For example, girls and women are given less food  than boys and men of the family. 
Men and boys are given more scope to develop themselves, e.g., men  are given more opportunity for basic and higher education. Men, usually     inherit the properties of the family, while women usually do not get  a share. 
If you believe in patriarchal values you will not see anything wrong if a  woman is ill-treated. If you believe in equality you will respect a woman as  a person. 

In our society the structure of caste is very strong and people who are  from a socially advantaged class are in favour of maintaining status quo.  Due to the caste structure, certain people of our society do not get  opportunities to develop and get the benefits of the mainstream. As an  ASHA we have to first understand problems of the poor and marginalised  communities. They need to be educated about their rights and  entitlements. Empower them. Encourage them to share their views and  feelings. Treat each individual equally irrespective of her or his class, caste,  sex and religion. 

2. Value of Responsibility 

Your behaviour should be responsible. You should promote your own health  and that of your family and community. You may keep your own house      clean and throw garbage in the street, which is not responsible behaviour.      As a member of the community you need to throw garbage at the      designated place so as to prevent infectious diseases. 

The Sarpanch of your village has the power to make decision for the  development of your village. Many times people misuse this power and use  it for their own benefit or benefit of their friends, relatives and/or      caste.Being responsible for your own self and to the power you are      designated with is very important. No system works effectively if all the      designated  members do not perform their duties effectively and in a   coordinated manner. 

3. Believe in Peoples Knowledge and Experience 

All people have experience and knowledge. It needs to be respected and  valued while making any decision. Never view people as empty vessels needing 
