
51 
You need to be aware of different ways of coordination and how to ensure  effective coordination. With effective coordination you will be able to improve  the health status of your community. 
You need to coordinate with the health facilities to 

learn about decisions taken at the PHC or at the Integrated Child  Development officers’ level 

share your concerns regarding the access to health care and nutrition  services at the village level 

jointly plan health activities to get optimum outcome 

plan health camp at the village level and organise MAMTA Day 

set up mechanisms to ensure timely referrals for pregnant women 
There are different ways of coordination. The most common way of  coordination is to meet the concerned person regularly and discuss the issue  or share information. Another way of coordination is to call a meeting. You  may need special skills for effective coordination. Let us understand them. 
Each meeting needs to be productive. A productive meeting is well-planned  and result-oriented. Unproductive meetings are too long, vague in purpose,  poorly controlled and frustrating. 

Decide the agenda of the meeting. Decide who should be called. Invite only  those people who can contribute to the meeting and take follow-up  actions. 

Share the agenda with the concerned persons. This is very critical. At the  village level there may be no need to send a written agenda, However you  need to clearly orally inform them about the purpose of the meeting and  the points, which need to be discussed. 

At the beginning of the meeting, welcome all the participants. Make a  circular sitting arrangement to enable an enriching conversation/dialogue. 

Explain the purpose of the meeting again and make sure that they all have  a common understanding. Jointly fix how much time you need to spend on  the meeting. 

Give time to each person to share their views. Avoid simultaneous  discussions. 

If decisions need to be taken, discuss them and articulate the outcome. 

If actions need to be taken after the meeting, list down the actions along  with who is responsible for the action, who will support it and a time-line  for completion of the action. 

At the end of the meeting prepare a brief report. The report needs to  have following information: 
