13 
1960s, when India, to enhance economic development, started to cut trees  to export the wood and earn foreign exchange. As a consequence, the hill  soil washed away, causing landslides, floods and silting in the rivers below  the hills. Crops and houses too were destroyed, and women had to slog even  more for their fuel, fodder and water. All in all, it was the women who  were the main victims of India's deforestation policies. 
Against these harmful deforestation policies a movement called Chipko was  born. Chipko in Hindi means to cling, reflecting the protesters main  technique of throwing their arms around the tree trunks marked to be cut,  and refusing to move. In a remote hill town a contractor had been given  the right by the state to fell 3000 trees for a sporting goods store. The area  was already becoming barren. The women of the village decided to fight  against this. When the woodcutters were scheduled to arrive, the men were  lured away from the village leaving the women at home, busy with  household work. As soon as the woodcutters appeared, the alarm was  sounded and the village's female leader, a widow in her 50s, collected 27  women and rushed to the forest. The women pleaded with the woodcutter  calling the forest their maternal home and explaining the consequences  of felling trees. The woodcutters shouted at and abused the women and  threatened them with guns. The women in turn threatened to hug the  marked trees and die with them. It worked! The frightened labourers left  and the contractor backed off. In 1974, women in a nearby area used the  same tree-hugging technique in order to protest against the clearing of  their forestlands. 
Similarly, in your community you may come across several issues that require  to be addressed. For example, the anganwadi is not functioning well; children  and women are not receiving their entitlement of supplementary food; the  midday meal provided is not adequate or cooked properly. It could be that  widow pension is not being received in spite of all the required formalities  being completed by the widows of the village. So, to bring change in such  situations, some collective action is required. 
However, activism or protest is not the first step in any process towards  change. First, one needs to understand the situation and find out if things  can be changed through simply drawing the attention of the authorities  through  letters, appeals or direct dialogue. 
For instance, you can meet someone of importance concerning the issue, like  the Sarpanch, the ANM, the schoolteacher, the Talati and discuss the matter  in order to resolve it. 
Activism may not always be the best method of changing the world but it can  be quite useful under the right circumstances. It gives voice to a cause. 
Activism is particularly useful/effective when you have many people who are  affected with the same issues and the situation needs to be changed. If you 
