
39 

Some Tips for Effective Verbal Communication 

Accuracy 

Clarity 

Correctness 
Points to take care of while communicating: 

Maintain eye contact with the person with whom you are talking. 

Be confident while communicating. Stand or sit confidently. 

Stick to the point so that you do not end up using too much time. 

Be specific, sincere, honest and direct while  communicating 

Share feelings while communicating. 

Be open-minded. This will help you to understand the other person’s point      of view. 

Your voice should be loud enough so that everyone can hear you. Your  pronunciation should be clear. Use words which are easy to understand. Do      not use technical words or jargon. 

If someone has something worth mentioning, give them scope to do so.  Never forget to compliment/appreciate others. 
The speaker is assured that you are listening when you use verbal affirmations  like, “I see,” I” agree”, “uh, okay, then….” during the conversation at  appropriate points. 

Non-Verbal Communication 

We all know that communication is not only about words and languages. Even  silence communicates and eyes talk. Hence, it is important to understand  these forms of communication which are referred to as non-verbal  communication. 
Here are some non-verbal behavioural aspects which require extra attention. 

Eye contact : Looking at the person with whom you are talking is an  effective way of declaring that you are sincere/honest about what you are  saying and also communicates confidence. 

Body posture : The value or weight of your messages will increase if  you face the person, stand or sit appropriately close and hold your head erect. 

Facial expressions : Express appropriate feelings on your face. Effective  communication requires supporting facial expressions. 

Gestures:  Use of hand gestures to describe and emphasise adds value but  it should not be overdone in excitement or anxiety. 

Voice characteristics : The volume, tone, speed of speech and pitch should  be well modulated. 
