
45 
To eradicate malaria completely you need to  mobilise people and think of solutions to  control the drainage problem. 

Gather Information 

Once the problem is identified, collect all the necessary information, seek  advice from the appropriate authority and involve the community. Use all  available resources in a way to amicably solve this issue. 

Think of Alternatives 

At this stage of decision-making you need to arrange a community meeting  and discuss the situation with people with whom you have worked with to  collect information regarding the problem. You may also present this in the  Gram Sabha. What is important is that people accept and understand the  problem. Later, alternative solutions may be suggested. 
In participatory decision-making, it is very important that the community  owns the problem and feels responsible towards solving it. 
Moreover, unless people accept the solution, it cannot be achieved on a  permanent basis. 

Choose an Alternative 

Part of effective decision-making is the ability to select one good alternative  from the various options available. This can be done through consensus of the  community and approval, of the authorities. To gain consensus and approval  you would need to discuss it in the village meetings, the Gram Sabha,  Panchayat meetings etc. 
Before selecting the right alternative, assess all available options. It is  important to be practical in taking a decision. 

Put the Decisions to Work 

An effective decision is one which can be put into action. Thus,  implementation is very important. During this process, keep checking if it is  moving towards the expected solution, and if there is something else which  needs to be addressed. 
Nobody is an expert in every skill.They can be mastered only through  practice. Hence, decision-making skills can also be sharpened through  experience and practice. 
But one needs to be confident and prepared to take responsibility if the  decision fails. This is part of the learning process. Accepting responsibility for  your actions is a very important quality and a sign of maturity. 
