
ASHA Module 7 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
46 

Medicines should also be provided for the partner.  
If repeated STIs occur, testing can be done at District Hospital for Below   Poverty people Line (BPL), free for others. 

HIV and AIDS 
You can increase awareness on HIV and AIDS: On its transmission, its   prevention and services available. You can also help in reducing myths and   misconception as well as stigma and discrimination associated with it. Know   the following: 
HIV is transmi ed through: a) having unprotected sex (sex without condom);   b) receiving HIV infected blood or blood products; c) using/sharing   unsterilised needles or lancets; and d) from HIV infected mother to her baby.  
It does not spread through any other mode such as kissing and touching,   holding hands, mosquito bites, sharing clothes, or through saliva, nose    uids, tears.  
Who is at higher risk: Commercial Sex Workers (CSWs), Injecting Drug   Users (IDUs), Men who have Sex with Men (MSM), migrant labourers,   persons with multiple sexual partners, babies born to mothers who are HIV   infected, and persons with other STIs.  
Persons with HIV are at greater risk of ge ing Tuberculosis. Every 1 in 20   persons su ering from TB in India is also HIV infected.  
HIV can be prevented by using condom during sexual intercourse   (protected sex), using safe blood (when blood transfusions are necessary)   from blood bank of government hospitals or recognised hospitals only,   using sterilised needles/avoid sharing of needles, and by avoiding sex with   multiple partners.  
HIV testing and management facility is available in the District Hospital free   of cost. Treatment services for AIDS are available in some district hospitals   or in the main government hospital in the big cities.  
You should encourage persons at high risk to go for HIV test. If women who   are at high risk become pregnant, they must be motivated to gets tested,   as timely treatment may prevent transmission of HIV from HIV infected   mother to baby.  

For cure of STIs, medicines are necessary, but for relief you could   advice the woman to:  

Sit in a pan of clean, warm water for 15 minutes. Add lemon juice to the water. 


Do not have sex until she feels better. 


Try to wear cotton next to the skin. 


Wash undergarments every day. 


 Pour clean water on genitals after passing urine. 
