
get admission in hospitals or to buy medicines for their kids. Your role is to  guide them to get good care in time and that is affordable. 
Village people have a practical sense of solving problems with simple  resources. Thus they should be involved in village health planning to assess  health needs and also help in selecting appropriate solutions to address the  common problems. 
Schools, fair price shops, water, electricity, seeds, fertilizers, credit, animal care,  bus/jeep, roads, employment, forest produce, common grazing grounds, post-  office, haatwe need all these services in the village. Health care is just one  more. It is not isolated, but part of the whole life of the village. As ASHA, you  shall do your best to help your own people in their struggle for health and share  joys of life. People have expectations from you. In following pages, you will  learn about your specific tasks to be undertaken by you as ASHA. 

Village Health Plan 
You should participate in Village health planning and help nursedidi, anganwadi  behen, and Panchayat members. This will be the foundation of all health work  in the village. Village health planning helps us to select important health issues  and make a work plan to solve them. Everybody's participation is necessary.  NGO workers, school teachers, representatives of self help groups will also help  in micro planning. You should ensure that marginalized population groups such  as Scheduled castes, tribes, minorities and women are adequately involved in  the planning process. When people participate in planning, they also help in  offering solutions and carrying out the tasks. 
Most villages will have health and sanitation committee. The committee  members take initiative for development of village health plans. Village health  planning needs some facilitators They bring people together, activate them to  think and plan with people, map out problems and encourage solutions.  Depending on the availability some NGOs workers can provide facilitation.  Teachers can also help you. You should work proactively with anganwadi behen  and nurse Didi to decide on the venue and timings for the planning meeting. 
Village health plans provide a framework for health related actions. Many  actions lead to health. Village planning is a community approach to solve  problems. You will learn more about it in the subsequent exposures of our  learning programme. 
8 
READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA  
