17 
to be filled with knowledge. They should not be viewed as passive recipients.  They need to be active in sharing their views while making decisions. For  example, if pregnant women are not coming forward to get their names  registered you will need to find out why they are not coming. Ask them to  suggest strategies to increase registration of pregnant women and how they  could contribute to making the strategy work. 
4. Values of Trust 

When people honour each other, there is a trust established that leads to  synergy, interdependence and mutual respect. Gaining the trust of those  around you is not a difficult or unachievable task. Trust can be created by  sharing feelings, thoughts, views and being transparent. Trust is a glue that  holds people together. 
Some of the values promoted by Mahatma Gandhi 

Always speak the truth 

Believe in the power of non-violence 

A person should not be discriminated against on the basis of her or his  caste, religion, sex, class or ethnicity. Everyone should be treated as a  human being. 

If you have made a mistake never be ashamed to apologise or express  regret and ask for forgiveness. 

Never misuse common resources like land, water, forests, wood, etc. It  belongs to every individual on earth and all should have equal  access to  these resources. 

You can touch the heart of people if you are committed to serve them. 

Keep people at the centre of your activities and believe in the power of  people. 
It is a fact that people who are conscious of their value-based priorities are  more fulfilled and happier in their lives. They make more effective decisions  about their own and their family and communitys growth and development.  To know your personal values is to be more aware of who you are, what you  want and what you dont want. 
As an ASHA, your work is very important. With that you should also value your  family and community. You also need to think about what is more important  to you and why. Answering these questions for yourself can be revealing. In  some situations the family may be important and in some it may be the  work. One is actually a means to another. Working together may enable you  to support your family, providing you an opportunity to develop. Having a  family may provide support to your work. Understanding your values enables  you to move ahead and maintain a balanced and fulfilling lifestyle. 
