
ASHA Module 7 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
10 

Counselling on Malnutrition 
All the above messages are important for managing malnutrition also. But   there are too many points to list out and the family members may not register   it. Also, many of the messages may not be applicable to that particular child, or   may not be possible for that family. For these reasons, we have to do it in two   steps   rst an analysis of why a child is malnourished and once we have an   understanding of this, then a dialogue with the family to see what can be done. 
For an analysis, we need to know the following:   What is the nutritional status of child  is it normal, underweight,   moderately underweight or severely underweight? 
 What is the child being fed as compared to what needs to be given? 
 What is the recent history of childs illness, and whether enough has been   done to treat it promptly and to prevent further illness? 
 What is the familys access to the three key services? (ICDS, Health   Services and Public Distribution Services) 

Skill in Eliciting Information 
There is a skill of asking each question so as to get the right information. 
What the child is being fed   Ask speci cally what was fed in the last one day, starting from now and   recalling backwards, till the previous day.  

Note 
Wasted expenditure on unnecessary services is also an issue. Families tend   to spend a lot of money in commercial health foods which are very costly.   This money is better spent in buying cheap, lower cost locally available   nutritious foods. Tonics and health drinks are also a waste for the poor family.   Unnecessary and costly treatments by local doctors for the recurrent bouts   of diarrhoea and minor colds and coughs could also be a drain. One of the   important services that you can perform is in making people aware that such   expenditures are unnecessary.  

are to be given. Even pregnant women and lactating mothers up to six   months are entitled to get food supplements in the anganwadi centres. 

Weighing the baby and informing the family of the level of   malnutrition is another important anganwadi service.  

The anganwadi is also the site where the Village Health and Nutrition   Day (VHND) is conducted. The ANM visits every month and the   child is given immunisation, Vitamin A, paediatric iron tablets,   Oral Rehydration Salts (ORS) packets or drugs needed for illness   management. 
