
Part A 

Being an ASHA 
9 

3. Measurable Outcomes of the ASHA Programme 

In the course of conducting these  ve activities, the ASHA should ensure the   following:  

Maternal Health  
1. That every pregnant woman and her family receive health information for   promotion of appropriate healthcare practices  diet, rest and for increased use   of services which would focus on care in pregnancy, delivery, postnatal care and   family planning services.  
2. That every pregnant woman avails of antenatal care and postnatal care at the   monthly health worker clinic/VHND. 
3. That every family with a pregnant woman has made a plan and is prepared for   the event of childbirth.  
4. That every couple that needs contraceptive services is counselled on where to   avail of the service.  

Newborn and Child Health  
1. That every newborn is visited as per the schedule, more o en if there are   problems and receives essential home-based care as well as appropriate referral   for the sick newborn. 
2. That every family receives the information and support it needs to access   immunisation. 
3. That all families with children below the age of two years are counselled and   supported for  prevention and management of malnutrition and anaemia and for   prevention of illness such as malaria, recurrent diarrhoea and respiratory infection.  
4. That every child below  ve years with diarrhoea, fever, Acute Respiratory   Infection (ARI) and worms, brought to her a ention is counselled on whether   referral is immediately required or whether, given the problems of access to a   doctor,  rst contact curative care with home remedies and drugs in her kit, the   child can be managed. 

Disease Control 
1. That those individuals noticed during home visits as having chronic cough or   blindness or a skin patch in a high leprosy block are referred to the appropriate   centre for further check-up.  
2. That those prescribed a long course of drugs for tuberculosis or leprosy or surgery   for cataract are followed up and encouraged to take the drugs or go for surgery. 
3. That those with fever which could be malaria (or kala  azar) have their blood   tested to detect the disease and provide appropriate care/referral. 
4. That the village and health authorities are alerted to any outbreak of disease she   notes during her visits.  

Note: Each outcome is not a separate activity. They are part of the protocol   followed during a single activity  _  the home visit. 
