24 

The public health services should be available free of cost. 

Information about the services available should be accessible to community  members irrespective of their caste/class/religion/sex. They should be  aware about their entitlements from the Public Health System. 

All health services should be gender-sensitive and address an individual’s  life-cycle needs and requirements. 

Health facilities and services must be scientifically and medically  appropriate and of good quality. 
Answer the following questions to know whether or not your community’s  rights to health are protected: 

Is the health service available free of cost to all the community members  through the Public Health System? 

Does your ANM visit your village regularly and visit all the area of your  community to provide free health services? 

Is the health facility located at a place which can be reached easily? 

Is the health service financially affordable for the  majority of the people in  the community? 

Is the community aware about all the health services and entitlements that  they can avail of from the Public Health System? 

Is the community aware of the maternal benefit schemes like Janani  Suraksha Yojana (JSY) or any other health schemes being implemented by  the government? 
If the answers to these questions are “NO”, it means that your community’s  Right to Health is not protected. If your community members have to pay for  the health services from the Public Health System, their Right to Health is not  protected. As an ASHA, if you do not know the answer to the above  mentioned questions, get the information from the community by discussing  these matters with them. You are a critical link between the community and  the Health Facility. To exercise the  community’s Right to Health you also  need to monitor, identify gaps and articulate their health care needs to the  appropriate health care providers. Therefore, you need to be well aware of  the health structure, systems and its operational issues and standards. 
Different health services are available at various levels. Let us first learn  about them. Usually the health services are available at the state, district,  cluster and village levels. 

Village level 

At the village level there is a Sub-Centre. It provides the following health  services under various programmes: 
