
19 
INTRA-NATAL CARE AND POST-NATAL CARE 

Post-natal care 
Post-natal period is the period of six weeks immediately after delivery,   which is important both for the mother and the newborn. In this period, the   changes, which have taken place in the organs/system during pregnancy in   the woman come back to normal, except breasts. Mother and the newborn   are susceptible to some problems which you should be aware of, so that   they can be guided for treatment/referral. 

Care during post-natal period 

During post-natal period, a woman requires nutritious and balanced diet,   which is rich in iron, calcium, vitamins and proteins. She should increase   her intake of green leafy vegetables, pulses, jaggery, etc. and eat to her   satisfaction. She should also take more milk during this period.  

Under nourished women are given supplementary food from Anganwadi   Centre by AWW. Ensure that they do come and receive it. 

It is important to give information about different contraceptive   methods, which a couple can use during the post-partum period. A   woman can have sex after six weeks, as by that time any perineal   tear or other procedures carried out during child birth. 

Roles and responsibilities of ASHA: 

Advise the woman at least one check-up within two weeks of delivery.  

Advise the women to visit the ANM for minor complaints e.g. sore breasts,   cracked nipples, foul smelling discharge, pain in legs etc.  

Assist ANMs in conducting post-natal clinic and screening women and   children with danger signals. 

Advise registration of birth. 

Counsel on exclusive breast-feeding for the newborn which:  


 helps in better involution of the uterus. 


 can produce lactational amenorrhea and thus act as natural   contraceptive. 

Counsel them on contraceptive needs (temporary/permanent) as required   and help the women/family to get the same. 

Ask mother to report if there is: 


 Excessive vaginal bleeding 


 Loss of consciousness 


 Fast or difficult breathing 


 Fever 


 Severe abdominal pain  
