
Part D 

Introduction to Infectious Diseases 
63 

Tuberculosis 

Tuberculosis (TB) is a highly infectious bacterial disease caused by a germ   ( Mycobacterium tuberculosis) . TB can a ect any part of the body. When it a ects   the lungs, it is called pulmonary TB. The commonest form of TB is pulmonary   TB. It a ects over 2 million people in India. TB in any other part of the body   (i.e. other than lungs) is called extra-pulmonary TB. 

How does TB spread? 
TB germs usually spread through tiny droplets in the air, when a patient with   pulmonary tuberculosis coughs or sneezes. When these droplets are inhaled   by a healthy person, s/he gets infected with TB. This infected person will have   a 10% lifetime risk of developing TB. Spread of disease is increased in poorly   ventilated houses where many people live close together or in high dust areas   like mines and quarries. An undernourished or malnourished patient is also   at a high risk of contracting and dying of TB. Both drugs and nourishment are   needed to achieve a cure in such persons. Children can also get both forms of TB. 

 When should TB be suspected? 
The symptoms of pulmonary TB are:   Cough with sputum for two weeks or more 
 Pain in chest 
 Sometimes the presence of blood stained sputum (haemoptysis) with   symptoms like: 

Rise in evening temperature 

Night sweats 

Loss of weight 

Loss of appetite. 

A person with cough for two weeks or more is a suspect for TB and should be   referred to a PHC/CHC/DH for the confirmation of diagnosis.  

How to diagnose TB? 
Sputum examination is the main tool for diagnosing pulmonary TB. 
The diagnosis is made when the germ is present in the sputum of the   patient. At least two sputum samples have to be tested (one   of which has to be collected  rst thing in the morning at the   patients home and the other at the health facility). A receptacle   for collection of sputum at home is given to the patient at the   microscopy centre at the health facility). The two samples   should be collected for examination preferably within 24 hours.   The sputum is stained by a special dye and examined under a   microscope by trained personnel.  
