
Part A 

Child Health & Nutrition 
25 

Ask the mother to o er the child some water in a cup or spoon. Watch   the child drink. Is the child not able to drink or is drinking poorly? Is the   drinking eagerly, thirsty? 
A child is  not able to drink  if he is not able to suck or swallow when   o ered a drink. A child may not be able to drink because he is lethargic or   unconscious.  
A child is  drinking poorly  if the child is weak and cannot drink without   help. He may be able to swallow only if  uid is put in his mouth. 
A child has the sign  drinking eagerly, thirsty  if it is clear that the child   wants to drink. Look to see if the child reaches out for the cup or spoon   when you o er him water. When the water is taken away, see if the child   is unhappy because he wants to drink more. 
If the child takes a drink only with encouragement and does not want to   drink more, he does not have the sign drinking eagerly, thirsty. 
PINCH the skin of the abdomen. Does it go back: Very slowly (longer than   2 seconds)? Slowly?  
Step 3: How to Classify Diarrhoea 

Signs/Symptoms  Status  Action to be taken 
Two of the following signs: 

Lethargic or unconscious  

Sunken eyes  

Not able to drink or drinking poorly 

Skin pinch goes back very slowly. 
Severe   Dehydration 


Refer URGENTLY  to hospital with   mother giving frequent sips of ORS/  fluids on the way.  
Two of the following signs: 

Restless, irritable  

Sunken eyes  

Drinks eagerly, thirsty 

Skin pinch goes back slowly. 
Some   Dehydration 


Give fluid and food for some   dehydration (Plan B). 

Follow-up in 2 days if not improving. 
Not enough signs to classify as some or   severe dehydration.   Passing urine normally. 
No Dehydration 

Give fluid and food to treat diarrhoea   at home (Plan A). 

Follow-up in 2 days if not improving. 
Diarrhoea for 14 days or more.  Severe   Persistent   Diarrhoea 


Refer to hospital. 
Blood in the stool.   Dysentery  

Referral if possible. 
 
Or give Cotrimoxazole for 5 days. (see   Annexure 6 for dosage) 

Follow-up in 2 days. 
