20 
the spirit of the Right to Equality. Such a policy is known as Positive  Discrimination or a Protective Discrimination policy. 

Right to Freedom 

The Right to Freedom is a cluster of the following six freedoms: 
Freedom of speech and expression 
Freedom to assemble peacefully and without arms 
Freedom to form associations or unions 
Freedom to move freely throughout the territory of India 
Freedom to live and settle in any part of India 
Freedom to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or  business. 
The aim of the Right to Freedom is the development of a person. She/he  should enjoy her/his rights democratically, and She/he should be able to live a  healthy and civic life. This right is very crucial for democracy. 

Right Against Exploitation 

When we accept everyone as human, we cannot treat anyone as a slave.  She/he cannot be kept in captivity. She/he cannot be forced into labour.  Citizens are protected against such exploitation by the law. Earlier there was  practice of bonded or forced labour. Sometimes such traditions were carried  on for generations. The forced labour system has now been abolished.  Practice of  this system is a crime which is punishable by law. 
In the same way, if children below the age of 14 years are asked to do work  beyond their capacity, and if they are employed in factories, mines or such  hazardous places, it is called exploitation and is a crime under the Abolition of  Child Labour Act. 

Right to Freedom of Religion 

The Right to freedom of religion provides religious freedom to all the citizens  of India. All religions are equal before the state and no religion can be given  preference over the other by the state. 
However, religious freedom also has to be observed under certain limitations.  The state can regulate the non-religious activities of any religious community  in the interest of public order, morality and health. 

Cultural and Educational Rights 

India is a country of multiple religions, languages and cultures. Any community  which has a language and script of its own, has the right to conserve and  develop them. All minorities, religious or linguistic groups, can set up their 
