
Healthy dietary practices 
Food items in the meals should have all the tastes. Sweet food are heavy to  digest and hence should be consumed first. Avoid overeating. Always try to  heat, when one feels appetite. Do not skip meals for long intervals if there is  no medical indication. While eating the simple rule is – donot overfill the  stomach, one third of the stomach should remain empty for facilitating  proper movements and digestion of food. Do not eat too hot, too cold and too  spicy food. Never eat hurriedly. Combination of dal and cereals (like khicri) is  healthy practice. 

We should eat thoroughly washed vegetables and fruits as well as  cooked meals. 

We should eat sprouted grains as often as possible. Such grains are rich  with nutrients. 

Washing and then cutting vegetables saves important vitamins and  minerals. If we cut and then wash, these elements are wasted. (Find out the  difference yourself. Which process makes the wash-water green?) 

Iron vessels are good for cooking food as they provide iron. 

Use clean utensils for cooking food. 

Covering food while cooking saves some vitamins. 

Fresh cooked food is better than stale food. Avoid storing cooked food and  store until next meal. 

Food should be covered to protect from dirt and insects. 

Washing hands before cooking and eating prevents germs entering  our bodies. 

Feed children more often, 4-5 times a day. They need to eat frequently.  From one year onwards, child can eat from family pot. 

What is balanced diet? 
Food has five basic elements: fats (fats from oils and ghee), proteins (white of  egg, pulses-milk) carbohydrates (cereals, sugar, sweets), minerals like calcium  or iron, and vitamins. Minerals and vitamins are necessary in minute quantities.  You will learn about nutritional values of commonly consumed food. 
Food grains like rice, wheat, sorghum, maize, ragi, bajra etc make the bulk of  our daily food. They give us energy. Some people think that only rice and wheat  are good. The reality is different. Bajra, ragi, jowar, maize are not inferior foods.  These also rich in nutrients. 
