
29 

Changes in girls  Changes in boys 

Breasts:  In most girls, puberty starts   with breast growth. When breasts start   to develop, one may notice small, tender   lumps under one or both nipples that will   get bigger over the next few years. When   breasts first begin to develop, it is not   unusual for one breast to be larger than   the other. However, as they develop, they   will be alike in size and shape.  
Hair:  Soft hair will start to grow in the   pubic area (the area between legs). This   hair will eventually become thick and   very curly. Hair grows under the arms   and on the legs.  
Body shape:  Hips get wider and waist   will get smaller. Body will also begin to   build up fat in the stomach, buttocks,   and legs. This is normal and gives body   the curves of a woman. 
Body size:  Arms, legs, hands, and feet   may grow faster than the rest of the   body.  
Skin:  Skin may get more oily. This is   because glands are growing too. Almost   all teenagers get acne at one time or   another.  
Menstruation:  During this period   menstrual cycle, or “period” begin. Most   girls get their periods between 9 and 16   years of age.  
Body size:  Arms, legs, hands and feet may   grow faster than the rest of the body.  
Body shape:  Adolescents will get taller   and shoulders will get broader. They will   gain a lot of weight. During this time,   many boys experience swelling under   their nipples. This may cause them to   worry that they are growing breasts.   During puberty, muscles will also get   bigger. 
Voice:  Voice will get deeper. This may   start with voice cracking.  
Hair:  Hair will appear under arms, on   legs and face, and above penis. Chest   hair may appear during puberty or later,   although not all men have chest hair.  
Skin:  Skin may get more oily and may   sweat more.  
Penis:  Penis and testes will get larger.   Boys get erections due to an increase in   sex hormones. Erections occur when the   penis gets stiff and hard - sometimes   for no reason. This is normal. Body will   also begin to produce sperm during   puberty. This means that during an   erection, adolescents may also experience   ejaculation. This occurs when semen   (made up of sperm and other fluids) is   released through the penis. This could   happen during sleep. This is called a   nocturnal emission or “wet dream.”  

ADOLESCENCE : THE PERIOD OF GROWING UP 
