40 

Active Listening is Communication too 

All of us can hear, but all of us cannot listen. Hearing and listening are not the  same. Hearing is involuntary, while listening involves the reception and  interpretation of what is heard. It decodes the sound heard meaningfully.  Does a knock on the door sound the same all the time? What if you are alone  and you hear a knock late at night? What happens if you hear a knock when  you are expecting someone whom you like? 
Active listening involves listening with a purpose. It may be to gain  information, obtain directions, understand others, solve problems, share  interests, see how the other person feels, or even show support. This type of  listening takes the same amount of, or more, energy than speaking. It  requires the listener to hear various messages, understand the meaning and  then verify the meaning by offering feedback, or confirming by paraphrasing  what was heard. 
Following are some of the tips for good listening: 

Maintain eye contact 

Sit or stand in a receptive position, lean forward 

Encourage by using  positive gestures and words 

Remove distractions 

Understand non-verbal signals 

Stop talking or doing what you were doing before you began listening 

Give time for listening 

Do not pass judgments or criticise mid-way while some one is speaking 

Reflect on the feeling  expressed and paraphrase what has been heard 

Have patience 
As an ASHA, keep the following points in mind while communicating with your  community. 

Never discriminate on the basis of caste and class while communicating  with the community. Your tone and gesture should not change while talking  to socially and economically disadvantaged community members. Talk to  them with respect and dignity. 

A community has immense knowledge and experience. Give people a  chance to share and use it. Do not treat them like empty vessels. 

Never make any comment which emphasises gender inequality. Your  communication should be gender-sensitive. 

Do not react fast. Listen, assimilate, analyse and then react. 
