
39  Maternal Health 

Part B 

 Encourage and support for exclusive breastfeeding (Please see section   on Breastfeeding-Part C, Section 3) 


 Discuss with the mother the need for contraceptive services.   Caution her on the risk of unprotected sex and the high   chances of conceiving again. You should counsel her on the   importance of spacing the next child birth for her own   health and that of the baby. You should help her in making   the choice of the method of family planning, whether spacing or   limiting.  

Complications during the post-partum period 
Some women can develop complications a er   the childbirth. The symptoms of these major   complications are: 
1.  Excessive bleeding:  Ask the mother if the   bleeding is heavy. O en this is quite obvious,   but sometimes it may be di  cult to judge.   If the woman is using more than  ve pads   a day or more than one thick cloth in a day,   she is having heavy bleeding. You should   immediately refer her to an institution which   manages complications. You should also ask   the mother to begin breastfeeding immediately, that should help reduce   the bleeding. Referral is most urgent. Even the delay of a few minutes can   make a di erence.  
2.  Puerperal Sepsis (Infections):  Ask if the discharge is foul smelling. If the   answer is yes, then suspect infection. Fever, chills and pain in abdomen   along with the foul smell make infections even more likely. You should   measure temperature to con rm fever. Referral is required since the   mother needs antibiotics. Referral on the same day is advisable.  
3.  Convulsions with or without swelling of face and hands, severe   headache, and blurred vision:  Such patients need immediate referral. If   ANM is available within 15 minutes, she can stabilise the patient before   referral. 
4.  Anaemia:  You should check if the mother is pale and enable the mother to   get her blood Hb status checked (for management of anaemia in the post-  partum period, please see Section 3). 
5.  Breast engorgement and Infection:  (Part C: Newborn Health) 
