19 
This the set of the Universal Human Rights. 

All human beings are born free and equal.   

Everyone should have the same rights and freedom, no matter of what  race, sex, or colour she or he may be. It should not matter where we  were born, what language we speak or what religion or political opinions  we have, or whether we are rich or poor. 

Everyone has the right to live, to be free and to feel safe. 

Adult men and women have the right to marry and start a family, without  anyone trying to stop them because of their race, country or religion.  Both have to agree to the marriage and both have equal rights in getting  married, during the marriage, and if and when they decide to end it. 

You may believe what you want to believe, have ideas about right and  wrong, and believe in any religion you want, and you may change your  religion if you want, without interference. 
The entire list of Human Rights is long and we shall not be discussing it here.  Let us now understand what are the Fundamental Rights. 

The Fundamental Rights 

As an Indian, our county has granted us six Fundamental Rights. They are: 

Right to Equality 

Right to Freedom 

Right against Exploitation 

Right to Freedom of Religion 

Cultural and Educational Rights 

Right to Constitutional Remedies 
Let us understand these rights in detail. 

The Right to Equality 

The state cannot discriminate against a citizen on the basis of race, caste,  sex, religion or place of birth. The state also cannot discriminate against  anyone in matters of employment. All citizens can apply for government jobs.  But the Right to Equality specifies certain expectations. The Constitution has  a special provision in the form of reserve posts while guaranteeing the Right  to Equality. Reserved posts are provided for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes  and other backward classes. Similarly, special provisions are provided for  women and children. 
The main reason for having these exceptions is that in our society various  kinds of inequalities still exist. You must have noticed how people become  victims of unequal treatment. Extending such protections does not contradict 
