
ASHA Module 6 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
44 

2. Schedule of Home Visits for the care of the Newborn 

The purpose of these visits is to ensure that the newborn is being kept warm   and breastfed exclusively. Encourage the mother to breastfeed, discourage   harmful practices such as bo le feeds, early baths, giving other substances by   mouth, and to identify early signs of sepsis or other illnesses in the newborn.  
The newborn requires a visit immediately a er birth (or within the  rst   24 hours), and on Day 2, if the baby is born at home.  
If the baby is born at a facility, persuade and support the mother to stay   for at least 48 hours, and therefore, the  rst two visits are taken care of   in the institution. However, if you are there with the mother, as a birth   companion, then you could be of assistance to the nurse/ANM there. 
If the baby is born in a health facility, or at home, you should visit the   baby on Days 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28.   Additional visits are needed for newborn babies which are LBW, born   before term and are sick.  

3. Examining the Newborn at Birth 

Steps for you to take just after the baby is born  
if the baby is born at home, or if you are present at the delivery, 
1. Ask the mother about/observe the  uid a er the waters break. 
2. If the  uid is yellow/green, as soon as the head is seen (even   before delivery of complete baby), clean the mouth of the baby   with gauze piece. 
3. As soon as the baby is born, note the time of birth and start   counting time. 
4. Observation of baby at birth or within the  rst 30 seconds and   at 5 minutes a er birth for movement of limbs, breathing and   crying. The  gure below will enable the assessment of whether   the newborn should be recorded as a live or still birth. All six   have to be No to declare a still birth. Even if one is yes the   baby should be declared as live birth.  
5. If there is no cry or a weak cry, if there is no breathing or weak   breathing or gasping, this condition is called Asphyxia. If the   baby is asphyxiated (does not breathe at birth), and there is no   doctor or nurse, you should try to help and this skill is taught   to you, in Module 7. However, in many such newborns, your   e orts may not make enough di erence and you should not   feel bad or blame yourself for this. (Management of asphyxia   will be taught in Module 7). 
