
Part C 

Newborn Health 
47 

Whether the baby has loose limbs.  
Listen to the cry of the baby.  
Provide care of eyes. If there is pus/purulent discharge from   eyes and no doctor or nurse available, apply tetracycline   ointment. Even for normal eyes, tetracycline is used as a   preventive, so even in doubt as to whether it is pus, it could   be given.  
Keep umbilical cord dry and clean.  
b. General precautions the family must take  The newborn is delicate and can easily fall sick if the family   and mother are not careful. You should explain some general   precautions that the family should take.  
Bathing the baby: Although it is recommended that the baby should not   be bathed until the  rst seven days, many families would like to bathe the   baby on the  rst or second day. For a normal baby, if the family insists, the   baby could be bathed a er the second day. But in the case of LBW baby, you   must insist on their waiting for at least seven days. You should explain that   bathing the baby and leaving it wet or exposed may cause it to get cold and   fall sick. Thus, it is be er to wipe the baby with a warm wet cloth and dry   the baby immediately. 
Keep the baby away from people who are sick. 
People who are sick with cold, cough, fever, skin infection, diarrhoea, etc.   should not hold the baby or come in close contact with the baby. 
The newborn baby should not be taken to places where there are other   sick children. 
The newborn baby should also not be taken to places where there are   large gatherings of people. 
c. What are you expected to do during the newborn visits?  Enquire and  ll the mothers information on home visit form.  (Annexe 6) 
Enquire and  ll newborn information on home visit form. These forms   help you to think about all the steps you need to take.  (Annexe 7) 
Take out the necessary equipment from the bag and keep on a clean cloth. 
Wash your hands well as taught. 
Then examine the baby  a. measure temperature, b. weigh the baby, and   c. perform other activities in the sequence provided in the newborn home   visit form.  (Annexe 8 & 9) 
Provide the care of eyes, skin and cord. 
Check that the home visit form is  lled in completely.  
