
ASHA Module 6 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
38 

6. Post-Partum Care  

Post-partum care is the period after delivery of the placenta up to six weeks   after birth.
3 

3 
 Post-partum care has been covered in ASHA Module 2. 

Tasks for you to undertake during this period 
 Conducting home visits to mother and child: Mothers and newborns   need care from the time of birth to six weeks a er the delivery.   The recommendation for postnatal care is to visit on the 3rd day   a er delivery, on the 7th day and at the end of six weeks, i.e on the   42nd day. For the newborn, the recommendation is to visit on the   3rd day, 7th day, 14th day, 21st day and 28th day. A er this period,   visits are still needed once in two weeks till the child is two years   old for nutrition advice, immunisation advice, and support for   breastfeeding and complementary feeding, for illness prevention   and just to remain in touch.  
 In e ect therefore, you would need to visit on the 3rd, 7th, 14th day,   21st, and 28th day, and a er that, once every two weeks starting from   the 42nd day, till the child is two years old. If the child is born at   home, then of course you should be there at birth or at least visit her   within the  rst hour.  
 Advice to the mother during these visits:  


 Assess the mother for signs of complications (see below for the   list of complications) and ensure appropriate referral. 


 Encourage her to rest for at least six weeks a er childbirth.   Families should be counselled to allow this.  


 Encourage her to eat more food than usual. She can eat any kind   of food but high protein foods  pulses and legumes (nuts are   especially useful), foods of animal source. She should also drink   plenty of  uids.  
Objectives of the session 
By the end of this session, the ASHA will learn about:  
 Schedule of visits and tasks to be performed at each visit. 
 Understand the possible complications of the post-partum period. 
 Be able to identify the complications and refer appropriately. 
