
29  Maternal Health 

Part B 

 The dosage regimen of two IFA tablets per   day should be repeated for three months   post-partum also.  
Counselling pregnant women on anaemia: 
  Encourage women to take iron-rich foods   such as green leafy vegetables, whole   pulses, ragi, jaggery, meat and liver. This   advice should be discussed with family and    nalised based on the family situation.  
  Encourage the woman, where possible,   to take plenty of fruits and vegetables   containing vitamin C (such as mango, guava, orange and sweet lime) as   these enhance the absorption of iron. 
  Counsel the women on the necessity of taking IFA, the dangers associated   with anaemia, and inform the women that these   side-e ects are common and not serious, and will reduce over time. 
  IFA tablets must be taken regularly, preferably early in the morning on an   empty stomach. If the woman has nausea and pain in abdomen, she may   take the tablets a er meals or at night. This will avoid nausea. 
 Dispel the myths and misconceptions related to IFA and convince the   woman about the importance of taking it. An example of a common myth   is that the consumption of IFA may a ect babys complexion. 
 Many women do not take IFA tablets regularly due to some common   side-e ects such as nausea, constipation and black stools. Tell women not   to worry about passing black stool while consuming IFA. It is normal.  
 In case of constipation, the woman should drink more water and add   roughage (plenty of green leafy vegetables) to her diet. 
 IFA tablets should not be consumed with tea, co ee, milk or calcium tablet   as it reduces the absorption of iron. 
 IFA tablets may make the woman feel less tired than before. However,   despite feeling be er, she should not stop taking the tablets and must   complete the course as advised by the healthcare provider. 
 Ask the woman to return to you if she has problem taking IFA tablets.  
How do you get the IFA? 
The IFA tablets are part of your drug kit. Try to ensure that you always have   enough stock. Either your facilitator or a person appointed by the MO of the   PHC is given the responsibility of re lls for the drug kit. IFA tablets are also   made available at VHND or in any health facility. 
