
29 

Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus)  
Kulattha or horse gram is a commonly found dal in our households and   has therapeutic benefits in many common ailments. In Urinary calculi,   1-2 gms of the powder of these seeds is indicated with warm water.   14-28 ml. of decoction of seeds thrice daily is also indicated in dysuria   and dsymenorrhoea. 50-100 ml. dal soup thrice daily is beneficial in   haemorrhoids and Rheumatoid arthritis. 

Kushmanda (Benincasa hispida)  
Popularly known as Petha, Kushuanda is familiar with households and   has medicinal properties. 7-14 ml. fresh juice of fruit with 3 gms. of   Yashtimadhu powder twice daily is useful in fits or epilepsy. It is also   indicated in peptic ulcer, acidity and burning sensation.10-20 ml. juice of   fruit-pulp with 10 gm. of sugar-candy two to three times a day is useful   in these conditions. In dysuria, 60 ml. of fruit-pulp with 5 gm. Yavakshara   and 25 gm. sugar twice daily is beneficial.  

Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum)  
Lavanga is the dried flower bud of Syzygium aromaticum Linn. cultivated   in many parts of the country. For cough, it could be chewed frequently.   125 mg. powder of fried Lavanga with honey twice daily could be given to   small children in cough. In vomiting of pregnant ladies, 1-4 gm. of Lavanga   powder with 14-28 ml. of sharbat of sugar twice daily could be given. In   diarrhoea, the water soaked with Lavanga is given for repeated drinking.  

Maricha (Piper nigrum Linn.)  
Pepper is a common spice found in our houses having medicinal values. 1   gm. powder of seeds with ghee and honey twice daily is useful in cough.   In hoarseness, 1 to 2 gms. powder of seeds fried with ghee twice daily is   useful. In hiccough, 1-2 gms. powder of seeds with sugar twice daily is   beneficial. It is one among the three pungents (Trikatu) popularly used   in many gastro-intestinal and respiratory disorders. It is also useful in   reduced appetite and distaste. 

Musali (Asparagus abscendense Roxb.)  
Musali is a cultivated rhizome extensively used by the local physicians.   3-6 gm. powder of equal parts of Musali and Salmali root with 5-10 gms.   sugar and 5 gms. ghee thrice daily is used in weakness and debility. In   urinary disorders, 14-28 ml. decoction of Musali with 5 ml. of milk thrice  

AYUSH 
