
48 
Keep in mind that the attitude that you take in a negotiation (e.g, hostile or  cooperative) will set the tone for the interaction. If you are confrontational,  you will have a fight on your hands. 
Negotiating is a complex process but definitely one worth mastering. If you  keep in mind that you are responsible for the success or failure of the  negotiation, and if you follow the tips given here, you will find the process  easier. 
We need to understand that in a successful negotiation everyone wins. The  objective should be agreement, not victory or to make the other party or  person feel low. 
As an ASHA you will have to constantly negotiate with people and situations in  order to be able to fulfil your responsibility. It is important to realise that it is  quite a challenge to negotiate with people in authority but with enough  preparation and practice you can deal effectively with any kind of  situation  which requires negotiation. 

Let us Understand the steps of Successful Negotiation 

Ask for the other persons perspective 
In a negotiating situation use questions to find out what the other persons  concerns and needs might be. Some examples of likely questions are: What do  you need from me on this? What are your concerns about what I am  suggesting/asking? When you hear the other person express their needs or  concerns, use appropriate listening responses to make sure you heard  correctly. 
State Your needs 
In the process of negotiation the other person requires to know your needs.  It is very important to state not only what you need but also why you need it. 
Prepare options beforehand 
Before entering into a negotiating session, prepare some options that you can  suggest if your preferred solution is not acceptable. Anticipate why the other  person may resist your suggestion and be prepared to counter the same with  an alternative. 
Do not argue 
Negotiating is about arriving at solutions. Arguing is about trying to prove the  other person wrong. We know that during negotiation each party tries to  prove the other one wrong, no progress is made. Do not waste time in  arguing. If you disagree with something state your disagreement in a gentle,  but assertive, way. Do not demean the other person or get into a power  struggle. 
