35 
inform the community about the date and place of the health camp or day of  visit of the ANM and encourage them to be present at the camp. 
If the health service provider ill-treats a community member, take a note of  it and confront the person concerned. 

Leaders are accountable and responsible 

As an ASHA you are accountable, both to the community and the health care  provider. Be an effective link between both of them by sharing information  from one end to the other. 
Some tips to be accountable: 

You will gain personal power and the ability to get results if you assume  accountability in all situations, even if you do not immediately see the  results. 

Complain only to the person who can do something about it. 

Concentrating on blaming others or complaining will reduce your energy  and the energy of people around you. 

Venting your feelings once or twice is a good stress management  technique. Being constantly critical of them has no positive outcome. 
“Focus on action and not on blame” 
“If it is to be, it is up to me” 
“Light a candle instead of cursing the darkness ” 
Ultimately, you are the one responsible for yourself. You play a crucial part in  every situation in your life. What you are today is a result of your choice. This  is accountability. 

Leaders involve others in decision-making 

As a leader you have to make various decisions. A community leader rarely  makes a decision alone. By law, a decision, which affects the community  needs to be taken along with the community members. The community needs  to feel  ownership of decisions taken. Only then they will do their best to  achieve what they have decided. 
For example, as an ASHA you have to articulate and assert yourself for your  community’s health needs. You need to decide and prioritise the health needs  of the community along with community members and jointly develop a plan  of action. This will encourage them to join hands with you to take necessary  action. 

Leaders motivates others 

To achieve the goal of the Right to Health you need the support of your 
