
33 
Gandhiji was a great leader. He took people along with him to achieve freedom  for our country. Let us see the principles that he followed as a leader. 

Courage:  Courage to stand up and be accountable for your beliefs  and opinions 

If your community’s Right to Health is violated, as an ASHA you need to have  courage to bring it to the notice of the concerned stakeholders. For example,  if the ANM is not coming to your village regularly or she is not visiting the  houses of socially backward families have courage to tell her that you have  noted her absence and you will take the necessary steps if this continues. If  she does not listen, be ready to inform the Sarpanch, SHG members and even  the medical officer. Continue your efforts till you ensure that she  visits all the  people in your village regularly. 

Responsibility:  Carry out your role and responsibility honestly 

As a leader you need to be responsible, first person for your self and then for  your community. As an ASHA you are given specific roles and responsibilities.  You should inform your community of these. This will prove useful in two  ways: 

If they are aware about your roles they will be able to bring it to your  notice if you are not performing it effectively. 

They will also support you in carrying out your roles and responsibilities  more effectively 

Encouragement:  Invite the community to join you in availing of their  right to quality health care 

Every individual needs encouragement. As a leader, whenever you meet  anyone read the unwritten words on their forehead “I am important.”  Encouragement comes by involving community members in the process when  availing for them their entitlements from the public health system or by  giving them some responsibility to improve the health environment in the  community. 

Improvement:  Constantly enhancing your competencies 

As a leader, an ASHA should constantly improve her knowledge and skills. Be  aware of any new decision made regarding the delivery of health services and  any new schemes declared. Be in constant dialogue with the ANM as she is a  good source of information. Your skills will improve by practising them. You  may fail too. From failures you learn what should not be done. If you are  repeating your mistakes it means that you are not learning. By learning you  will be able to stand out. 
