
ASHA Module 7 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
20 

4. Assessing the Sick Child 

Common illnesses in the young child could include: diarrhoea, cough and   cold, and fever. Each of these conditions will be discussed in the following   chapters. However, before you begin to learn about each speci c illness, you   need to know about the danger signs in a child.   

What are danger signs? 
Danger signs indicate serious illness. These can occur in many illnesses. Some   danger signs may occur without any relationship to the type of illness. For   example fever, diarrhoea, pneumonia, meningitis or malaria can all produce   lethargy or unconsciousness. These illnesses can also make the child so sick   that the child is not able to drink any  uids. These are called  general danger   signs.  The presence of even one general danger sign is enough to indicate   a severe disease. A danger sign calls for immediate referral. Where signs of   common illness like cold and cough, fever, and diarrhoea are present without   any of the danger signs, and where there is no doctor, you could provide   some home-based care to the child and keep a watch for signs that indicate   the need for referral.  
What are the questions to be asked when seeing a sick child?  Every child who is seen for an illness should be checked for the presence of   the following general danger signs:   Not able to drink or breastfeed  Vomits everything  Has convulsions  Is lethargic or unconscious. 

How to assess a sick child for danger signs? 

Step 1: ASK: Is the child able to drink or breastfeed?     A child has the sign not able to drink or   breastfeed if the child is not able to suck or   swallow when o ered a drink or breast milk.  If   the mother says that the child is not able to drink   or breastfeed, ask her to describe what happens   when she o ers the child something to drink. For  
Objectives of the session 
By the end of the session, the ASHA will learn about:  
How to identify general danger signs among sick children. 
Be able to recognise symptoms of common illnesses.  
Enable prompt referral. 
