
30 
READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 

daily is recommended. In Oligospermia, 3-6 gms. powder of Musali with   equal quantity of sugar-candy and 100 ml. milk is indicated twice daily.  

Nimbu (Citrus limon Linn.)  
Nimbu is a common citrus fruit used in our houses having various   therapeutic activities. In distaste and indigestion, it is indicated as 7-14   ml. juice of fruits three times a day after meals. In jaundice, 12-24 ml.   juice of fruit should be taken twice a day. In vomiting, syrup of sugar in   water with lemon juice is useful. In pain on heels, the use of nimbu cut   in two halves, warmed in sauce pan and applied as fomentation at ankle   joints and heels is indicated. In abdominal pain, 7-14 ml. fruit juice with   1 gm. Yavakshara thrice daily could be given. 

Nirgundi (Vitex negundo Linn.)  
Nirgundi is a small shrub seen all over the country and is used in various   ailments. In simple fevers, 14-28 ml.decoction of leaves with honey thrice   daily is useful. In rheumatic disorders and Sciatica 14-28 ml. decoction   of leaves thrice daily is recommended. 

Pippali (Piper longum Linn.)  
This is a perennial climber with slender branches. It grows wild in the rainy   parts of the country. This is one of the ingredients of ‘Three Pungents’   (Trikatu). It is commonly used in low digestive capacity in a combination   of 1gm. of fruit powder with 2 gms. salt and lemon juice after meals twice   daily. In productive cough, 2 gm. of powder of fruit with honey twice daily   is useful. In dry cough, 60 mg. powder of fruit and 120 mg. Saindhava   (rock-salt) with warm water twice daily is beneficial. In mucous diarrhoea,   mix 5 gm. powder of fruit in 1 litre buttermilk and divide equally into 4   parts. Take 1 part 6 hourly. 

Some compound formulations 

Lashunadi Vati 
In indigestion, diarrhoea and cholera, Lashunadi Vati 250 mg. is   recommended. Two Tablets thrice daily with warm water could be given.   Garlic is the main ingredient of the formulation. Plenty of boiled water   and ORS liquid also could be given in this condition.  
