
14 
READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 

Pregnant, adolescent girls are especially likely to be under-nourished   and are more likely to suffer problems during delivery. They need extra   nutritious food and help for safe delivery at a health facility. 

Sometimes there are overweight pregnant women who need to avoid   eating fat-rich food like oil, ghee, sugar, etc), but they should continue   to eat vegetables, fruits, nuts and milk which are rich in iron, calcium,   vitamins and minerals. They should also take regular exercise and   consult a doctor. 

Anaemia in pregnancy 
Lack of blood in the body is known as anaemia. It is very common in our   country. Anaemia in pregnancy leads to complications in pregnant women   and can even result in the death of mother and baby. You should be aware   that a pregnant woman with anaemia looks pale, feels tired, complains   of breathlessness on carrying out routine work, and might have swelling   of the face and body. Anaemia can be prevented and treated completely   if the woman follows the advice of ANM/doctor.  

Anaemia is treated with iron tablets, which have to be taken daily for   many months during pregnancy or by giving injections. If the anaemia is   severe, hospitalization and blood transfusion may be required. 

To prevent anaemia, all pregnant women need to take one iron tablet   daily, starting after three months of pregnancy. In this way, she must   take 100 tablets.  

While giving iron tablets, the woman should be advised that some side   effects might occur. However, they can be managed in the following   ways: 

Nausea or occasional vomiting  this can be prevented/avoided by   taking the tablet after meals. 

Constipation  this can be managed if the woman drinks more water   and eats fruits. 

Black stools or mild diarrhoea. 

Note 

Iron tablets should not be taken along with tea as that reduces its   absorption.  

Anaemia, pregnant women must have deliveries in hospital. 

Malaria in pregnancy 

Malaria during pregnancy might be fatal for the woman and may cause   abortion, stillbirth, low birth weight babies or premature labour. 
