
Mapping and learning more about our body 
Some of our organs are seen from outside like eyes, ears, breasts, testes. Let us  see where the other organs are  
Bony skeleton and attached muscles give body its basic frame. Skin covers all  the body and protects it from outside environment. Soft organs are inside the  chest and abdomen. Brain is inside the skull. 
A butterfly like important gland (Thyroid) is present in front of the neck. Goitre  is actually a swelling of this. Iodized salt prevents it. 
When we take a deep breath the chest expands. The lungs inside the chest and  fill like balloons. The wind pipe in the neck connects the nose throat to the lungs.  It indeed looks like an upside down tree, the windpipe in the place of trunk. 
Fear or excitement speeds up the heart. Normally heart beats are 72-84 times  in a minute. We can feel the beats pounding in the chest. Put an ear to your  friends chest. Can you hear heart beats? Where is it? Heart is just left of the  middle of the chest. Pipe like blood vessels connect the heart to rest of the  body. These carry blood from heart to all parts. Can you see the veins under your  skin? Blood is brought back to heart through veins. 
Let us drink a glass of cold water. Do you feel it going down from throat to  stomach? Food pipe carries food and drinks to stomach in the middle of upper  abdomen. Stomach stores and digests food for 1-2 hours. Then the food passes  down the gut. 
Do you feel the rumbling in abdomen when you are hungry? A long coil of gut  is in the middle of abdomen. This does further digestion. The long coils lead to  a wider short pipe called colon. The well known appendix sits on the colon on  lower right corner. Appendix does not serve any special purpose in the body. 
Colon is a bent pipe set against the abdomen walls going up from lower right  side, and then becomes horizontal going left. Then it goes down to the bag  storing waste. Finally it reaches the anus. 
Liver is high up on the right side. A swollen liver can be felt below the lower  right ribs. Similarly on the left side we have a small spleen. In some diseases  such as Malaria, spleen becomes very big. We can feel it below the left side ribs. 
35 
BODY MAPPING AND OVERVIEW OF ORGANS 
