
ASHA Module 7 

Simple Skills that Save Lives 
12 

it is many. Do not jump immediately to some point   and start giving your advice. Ask all the questions,   listen to the replies fully, think about it and then   only give your advice. 
Discuss what measures are needed in each case and how this is to be   conveyed? 

Skill of Counselling 

How to give advice  First praise the mother for how well she is coping with the child and   reinforce the good practices she is following. Praise must always precede   any other advice. 
Then deliver each message as needed for that child in the form of a   suggestion and ask whether they could implement it. Dialogue with the   family explaining why the step is needed and how they could achieve   it. If they are convinced, they would agree. If not convinced or unable to   agree, move on to the next message. It takes more than one visit and one   dialogue for families to agree, even if it was possible. 
Then point out any harmful or wasteful practices, explaining why you   say so.  
Arrange for a follow-up visit to see how many practices have changed and   to further reinforce the messages. Each family with a malnourished child   needs to be met about once or twice a month.  
Arrange for mother and child to meet the ANM or the doctor as required.   Such a visit is required in the following circumstances: 

Any child who is severely underweight. If, in addition, there are   danger signs, admission in a facility which manages such children   would be desirable.  

Any child who is underweight, who does not gain weight even a er a   few months of trying to follow the advice. 

Any child who is underweight, who has fever, or chronic cough or   persistent anaemia. 
Even if the family is not going to see the doctor or ANM, do inform the   Anganwadi Worker (AWW) and the ANM so that they can follow-up too.   This work is equally their work also.  
How you should NOT give advice  Do not prescribe advice without dialoguejust telling families what to do   would not help 
Do not give very broad and what can be perceived as insulting advice like    you must take care of your child, or you must keep the child clean, or you   must give nutritious food etc.  
