
Part A 

Being an ASHA 
15 

7. Village Health and Nutrition Day (VHND)  

VHND is a common platform for allowing the people to access the services of   the ANM and the male health worker and of the Anganwadi Centre (AWC).   It is held at the AWC once every month. The ANM gives immunisation to the   children, provides antenatal care to pregnant women and provides counselling   and contraceptive services to eligible couples. In addition, the ANM provides a   basic level of curative care for minor illness with referral where needed.  
The VHND is an occasion for health communication on a number of key   health issues. It should be a ended by the members of the PRI, particularly   the women members, pregnant women, women with children under two,   adolescent girls and general community members. The VHND is to be seen as   a major mobilisation event to reinforce health messages. You should provide   information on the topics given below during the VHND. These topics can be   taken up one by one and completed over a period of one year.  

Topics for Health Communication during the VHND  
 Care in pregnancy, including nutrition, importance of antenatal care and   danger sign recognition.  
 Planning for safe deliveries and postnatal care. 
 Exclusive breastfeeding and the importance of appropriate   complementary feeding. 
 Immunisation: the schedule and the importance of adhering to it. 
 Importance of safe drinking water, hygiene and sanitation, and discussion   on what actions can be taken locally to improve the situation.  
 Delaying the age at marriage, postponing the  rst pregnancy and the need   for spacing. 
 Adolescent health awareness, including nutrition, retention in school till   high/higher secondary level, anaemia correction, menstrual hygiene and   responsible sexual behaviour.  
 Prevention of Malaria, TB and other   communicable diseases. 
 Awareness on prevention and seeking care   for RTI/STI and HIV/AIDS. 
 Prevention of tobacco use and alcoholism. 

What should you do for a successful   VHND? 
 Make a list of the following and ensure   their presence during the VHND meeting: 

Pregnant women for their antenatal or   postnatal care.  
