
28 
READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 

Yoga plays an important role in the management of digestive disorders.   Asana helps to strengthen the weak abdominal muscles and improves the   function of the digestive system. Kriyas, the cleansing process, eliminates   the toxins and waste materials from the GIT. 

Rational drugs 
Ayurveda explains the therapeutics as basically two kinds – one kind is   promotive of vigour in the healthy; the other, destructive of the disease   in the ailing. A drug while inducing therapeutic effect, should not evoke   untoward effects. In this regard, herbal drugs like Ashwagandha, Shatavari,   Guduchi, Vasaka, Hareetaki, Amalki, Vibheetaki, Ginger etc. could be   considered as safe drugs. 

Some common AYUSH medicines 
We have seen that the knowledge about the use of medicinal plants   obtained from our surroundings is valuable. Let us study about some more   remedies commonly used in the country. 

Hingu (Ferula foetida Regel.)  
Hingu consists of gum resin obtained from rhizomes and roots of a   perennial herb occurring in Persia and Afghanistan. Hing is commonly   found in our kitchens and is used as a condiment. However, it would be   interesting to know that it is also used as a digestive and is useful in   common disorders like abdominal pain, flatulence and worm infestation.   In infants, hing mixed with breast milk is given orally for relieving pain   abdomen. Hing mixed with a little mustard oil can be applied gently over   the abdomen and a little piece of hing can be put over umbilicus for   relieving pain in abdomen. Hingwashtaka Churna, which contains hing as   main ingredient, half teaspoon mixed with luke warm water could be given   two-three times a day in abdominal pain and worm infestation. 

Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans Houtt.)  
Jatiphala consists of kernels of fruits from Myristica fragrans, an aromatic   tree commonly found in southern India. The fruit kernels are commonly   used in dysentery, diarrhoea and vomiting. For vomiting, powder of Jatiphal   mixed with tulsi juice and 1 gm. honey could be given two-three times   a day. In diarrhoea and dysentery, powder of equal quantity of parched   saunf (Shatapushpa), Jatiphala and sugar in the dose of 2 gm. three or   four times with cold water or scum of rice should be given. 
