
ne used if there are any ulcers in the mouth. Gargles with lukewarm water are  good for mouthwash after meals and particulars after eating sweet foods. 

Daily bath 
Our culture regards daily bath as a ritual. It is indeed necessary in hot weather  as sweating makes us dirty. (In very cold regions one may skip daily baths.) Use  water economically. Some people like hot water. Massage with warm sesame  or mustard oil is good before bath. Temperature of bath water should be neither  too hot not too cold. After retiring from daily work, we should wash feet, hands  and face with water to remove dirt and sweat. 

Clean cloth 
Clothes with comfortable fitting be used according to season. Cotton clothes of  light colour are more comfortable in summers and warm clothes in winters. Our  undergarments and other clothes must be clean to keep away skin infections  and louse infestation. A daily change is healthy practice. 

Hair care 
Combing the hair everyday is necessary for its health. A head-bath is necessary  especially if your hair stinks due to sweating. Mixture of Shikakai, Reetha and Amla  soaked in water is a simple, cheap and safe way for washing oily and sticky hair. For  louse, we need fine combs. Avoid using somebody else’s comb as it may have louse. 

Footwear 
Proper footwear is necessary to keep away germs and worms in the dust from  getting onto your feet. Many people walk or children play barefooted in the  fields. Sometimes these fields are also used for defecation. The worms present  in the faeces may get entry in the body when we walk bare footed. You will  learn more about these worms in subsequent books. Dusty and hot weather also  cracks our soles. Some people buy shoes, only to use them during festivals or  when going out to meet their friends and relatives. This is not good. The Indian  custom of keeping footwear outside the house is good. Everyone including  children should always wear shoes when going outside their houses. Shoes are  necessary for those who get cracked heal. 

What do you think? 

Long nails come handy when some one is attacking you physically. 

One can remove food particles in between teeth by needles. 

Lack of privacy for bath is a cause of skin illnesses. 
21 
PERSONAL HYGIENE 
